
The New York City Charter


NEW YORK CITY
CHARTER



Current through Local Law 2019/137, enacted July 20, 2019,
and includes amendments effective through July 27, 2019.



Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
800-445-5588
Fax: 513-763-3562
www.amlegal.com



Introductory



Section 1. The city.



   The city of New York as now existing shall continue with the boundaries
and with the powers, rights and property, and subject to the obligations and
liabilities which exist at the time when this charter shall take effect.



Section 2. The boroughs.



   The boroughs of the city are continued as existing at the time of the
adoption of this charter.



Chapter 1: Mayor



Section 3. Office powers.



   The mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the city.



Section 4. Election; term; salary.



   The mayor shall be elected at the general election in the year nineteen
hundred sixty-five and every fourth year thereafter. The mayor shall hold
office for a term of four years commencing on the first day of January after
each such election. A mayor who resigns or is removed from office prior to
the completion of a full term shall be deemed to have held that office for a
full term for purposes of section 1138 of the charter. The salary of the
mayor shall be two hundred fifty-eight thousand seven hundred fifty dollars a
year.



(Am. L.L. 2016/019, 2/19/2016, retro. eff. 1/1/2016)



Section 5. Annual statement to council.



   The mayor shall communicate to the council at least once in each year a
statement of the finances, government and affairs of the city with a summary
statement of the activities of the agencies of the city. Such statement shall
include a summary of the city's progress in implementing the goals and
strategies contained in the most recent final strategic policy statement
submitted by that mayor pursuant to section seventeen.



Section 6. Heads of departments; appoint; remove.



   a.   The mayor shall appoint the heads of administrations,
departments, all commissioners and all other officers not elected by the
people, except as otherwise provided by law.



   b.   The mayor, whenever in his judgment the public interest shall
so require, may remove from office any public officer holding office by
appointment from a mayor of the city, except officers for whose removal other
provision is made by law. No public officer shall hold his office for any
specific term, except as otherwise provided by law.



Section 7. Deputy mayors.



   The mayor shall appoint one or more deputy mayors with such duties and
responsibilities as the mayor determines.



Section 8. General powers.



   The mayor, subject to this charter, shall exercise all the powers
vested in the city, except as otherwise provided by law.



   a.   The mayor shall be responsible for the effectiveness and
integrity of city government operations and shall establish and maintain such
policies and procedures as are necessary and appropriate to accomplish this
responsibility including the implementation of effective systems of internal
control by each agency and unit under the jurisdiction of the mayor.



   b.   The mayor shall be a magistrate.



   c.   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the mayor shall
have the powers of a finance board under the local finance law and may
exercise such powers without regard to any provision of law prescribing the
voting strength required for a resolution or action of such finance board,
provided, however, that whenever the mayor determines that obligations should
be issued and the amount thereof, he shall certify such determination to the
comptroller who shall thereupon determine the nature and term of such
obligations and shall arrange for the issuance thereof.



   d.   The mayor shall establish a minimum per diem compensation for
inspectors of election and clerks employed to assist the inspectors of
election in polling places under the direction of the board of elections as
follows: on registration and primary election days twenty dollars; on
Election day thirty-five dollars, except that the chairman of each election
board shall receive an additional three dollars compensation per day. The
minimum per diem rate for compensation for election inspectors attending
classes of instruction shall be five dollars.



   e.   The mayor shall establish a professional internal audit
function in the executive office of the mayor which is sufficient to provide
the mayor with such information and assurances as the mayor, as the chief
executive of the city, requires to ensure the proper administration of the
city's affairs and the efficient conduct of its business.



   f.   Except as otherwise provided in section eleven, the mayor may,
by executive order, at any time, create or abolish bureaus, divisions or
positions within the executive office of the mayor as he or she may deem
necessary to fulfill mayoral duties. The mayor may from time to time by
executive order, delegate to or withdraw from any member of said office,
specified functions, powers and duties, except the mayor's power to act on
local laws or resolutions of the council, to act as a magistrate or to
appoint or remove officials. Every such order shall be filed with the city
clerk who shall forward them forthwith to the City Record for publication.



   g.   The city has the power to determine the duties of its
employees, and it is essential to the workings of city government that the
city retain control over information obtained by city employees in the course
of their duties. In the exercise of this power, the mayor may promulgate
rules requiring that information obtained by city employees be kept
confidential to the extent necessary to preserve the trust of individuals who
have business with city agencies. To the extent set forth in such rules, each
agency shall, to the fullest extent permitted by the laws of the United
States and the state of New York, maintain the confidentiality of information
in its possession relating to the immigration status or other private
information that was provided by an individual to a city employee in the
course of such employee's duties.



   h.   The mayor shall designate the head of an office of the mayor,
or of such other agency headed by a mayoral appointee as the mayor may
determine, to act as the city’s chief privacy officer. For the purposes of
this subdivision, identifying information has the same meaning as set forth
in section 23-1201 of the administrative code. Consistent with the provisions
of subdivision g of this section, such officer shall have the power and duty
to:



      1.   promulgate, after receiving the recommendations of the
committee established pursuant to section 23-1204 of the administrative code,
policies, and protocols regarding the collection, retention, and disclosure
of identifying information by agencies, contractors, and subcontractors,
provided that particular policies and protocols may apply to all agencies,
contractors, and subcontractors or to a subset thereof;



      2.   provide guidance and information to the city and every
agency thereof on federal, state, and local laws, policies, and protocols
related to the collection, retention, and disclosure of identifying
information and direct agencies to make any changes necessary to achieve or
maintain such compliance;



      3.   review, in collaboration with the committee established
pursuant to section 23-1204 of the administrative code, agency identifying
information reports submitted pursuant to section 23-1205 of the
administrative code;



      4.   specify types of information, in addition to identifying
information as defined in section 23-1201 of the administrative code, that
shall be subject to protection by agencies, as required by such officer,
based on the nature of such information and the circumstances of its
collection or potential disclosure.



(Am. L.L. 2017/245, 12/17/2017, eff. 6/15/2018)



Section 9. Removal of mayor.



   The mayor may be removed from office by the governor upon charges and
after service upon him of a copy of the charges and an opportunity to be
heard in his defense. Pending the preparation and disposition of charges, the
governor may suspend the mayor for a period not exceeding thirty days.



Section 10. Succession.



   a.   In case of the suspension of the mayor from office, the mayor's
temporary inability to discharge the powers and duties of the office of mayor
by reason of sickness or otherwise, or the mayor's absence from the city, the
powers and duties of the office of mayor shall devolve upon the public
advocate or the comptroller in that order of succession until the suspension,
inability or absence shall cease. While so acting temporarily as mayor
neither the public advocate nor the comptroller shall exercise any power of
appointment to or removal from office or any power lawfully delegated by the
mayor to a deputy mayor before the commencement of such suspension or
inability, or before or after the commencement of such absence; and shall
not, until such suspension, inability or absence shall have continued nine
days, sign, approve or disapprove any local law or resolution, unless the
period during which the mayor can act thereon would expire during said nine
days in which case the public advocate or the comptroller shall have the
power to disapprove the same within forty-eight hours before the time to act
expires.



   b.   In the case of a failure of a person elected as mayor to
qualify, or a vacancy in the office caused by the mayor's resignation,
removal, death or permanent inability to discharge the powers and duties of
the office of mayor, such powers and duties shall devolve upon the public
advocate, the comptroller or a person selected pursuant to subdivision c of
section twenty-eight, in that order of succession, until a new mayor shall be
elected as provided herein. Upon the commencement of the term of the person
first elected mayor pursuant to the provisions of subdivision c of this
section, the person then acting as mayor pursuant to the provisions of this
subdivision, if an elected official, shall complete the term of the office to
which such person was elected if any remains.



   c.   1.   Within three days of the occurrence of a vacancy in the
office of the mayor, the person acting as mayor shall proclaim the date for
the election or elections required by this subdivision, provide notice of
such proclamation to the city clerk and the board of elections and publish
notice thereof in the City Record. After the proclamation of the date for an
election to be held pursuant to paragraphs four or five of this subdivision,
the city clerk shall publish notice thereof not less than twice in each week
preceding the date of such election in newspapers distributed within the
city, and the board of elections shall mail notice of such election to all
registered voters within the city.



      2.   If a vacancy occurs during the first three years of the
term, a general election to fill the vacancy for the remainder of the
unexpired term shall be held in the year in which the vacancy occurs, unless
the vacancy occurs after the last day on which an occurring vacancy may be
filled at the general election in that same year with party nominations of
candidates for such election being made at a primary election, as provided in
section 6-116 of the election law. If such a vacancy occurs in any year after
such last day, it shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term at
the general election in the following year provided, however, that no general
election to fill a vacancy shall be held in the last year of the term, except
as provided in paragraph nine of this subdivision. Party nominations of
candidates for a general election to fill a vacancy for the remainder of the
unexpired term shall be made at a primary election, except as provided in
paragraph five of this subdivision.



      3.   If a special or general election to fill the vacancy on
an interim basis has not been previously held pursuant to paragraphs four,
six, seven and eight of this subdivision, the person elected to fill the
vacancy for the remainder of the unexpired term at a general election shall
take office immediately upon qualification and shall serve until the term
expires. If a special or general election to fill the vacancy on an interim
basis has been previously held, the person elected to fill the vacancy for
the remainder of the unexpired term at a general election shall take office
on January first of the year following such general election and shall serve
until the term expires.



      4.   If a vacancy occurs during the first three years of the
term and on or before the last day in the third year of the term on which an
occurring vacancy may be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term at a
general election with party nominations of candidates for such election being
made at a primary election, as provided in section 6-116 of the election law,
a special or general election to fill the vacancy on an interim basis shall
be held, unless the vacancy occurs less than ninety days before the next
primary election at which party nominations for a general election to fill
the vacancy may be made and on or before the last day on which an occurring
vacancy may be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term at the general
election in the same year in which the vacancy occurs with party nominations
of candidates for such election being made at a primary election, as provided
in section 6-116 of the election law.



      5.   If a vacancy occurs after the last day in the third year
of the term on which an occurring vacancy may be filled for the remainder of
the unexpired term at a general election in each year with party nominations
of candidates for such election are being made at a primary election, as
provided in section 6-116 of the election law, but not less than ninety days
before the date of the primary election in the fourth year of such term, a
special or general election to fill such vacancy for the remainder of the
unexpired term shall be held.



      6.   Elections held pursuant to paragraph four or five of this
subdivision shall be scheduled in the following manner: a special election to
fill the vacancy shall be held on the first Tuesday at least sixty days after
the occurrence of the vacancy, provided that the person acting as mayor, in
the proclamation required by paragraph one of this subdivision, may schedule
such election for another day not more than ten days after such Tuesday and
not less than forty days after such proclamation if the person acting as
mayor determines that such rescheduling is necessary to facilitate maximum
voter participation; except that



         (a)   if the vacancy occurs before September twentieth
in any year and the first Tuesday at least sixty days after the occurrence of
the vacancy is less than ninety days before a regularly scheduled general
election or between a primary and a general election, the vacancy shall be
filled at such general election; and



         (b)   if the vacancy occurs before September twentieth
in any year and the first Tuesday at least sixty days after the occurrence of
the vacancy is after a regularly scheduled general election, the vacancy
shall be filled at such general election; and



         (c)   if the vacancy occurs on or after September
twentieth in any year and the first Tuesday at least sixty days after the
occurrence of the vacancy is after, but less than thirty days after, a
regularly scheduled general election, the vacancy shall be filled at a
special election to be held on the first Tuesday in December in such year.



      7.   All nominations for elections to fill vacancies held
pursuant to paragraphs four and five of this subdivision shall be by
independent nominating petition. A signature on an independent nominating
petition made earlier than the date of the proclamation required by paragraph
one of this subdivision shall not be counted.



      8.   A person elected to fill a vacancy in the office of the
mayor at an election held pursuant to paragraph four of this subdivision
shall take office immediately upon qualification and serve until December
thirty-first of the year in which the vacancy is filled for the remainder of
the unexpired term pursuant to paragraph two of this subdivision. A person
elected to fill a vacancy in the office of the mayor at an election held
pursuant to paragraph five of this subdivision shall take office immediately
upon qualification and serve until the term expires.



      9.   If a vacancy occurs less than ninety days before the date
of the primary election in the last year of the term, the person elected at
the general election in such year for the next succeeding term shall take
office immediately upon qualification and fill the vacancy for the remainder
of the unexpired term.



      10.   If at any election held pursuant to this subdivision for
which nominations were made by independent nominating petitions, no candidate
receives forty percent or more of the vote, the two candidates receiving the
most votes shall advance to a runoff election which shall be held on the
second Tuesday next succeeding the date on which such election was held.



   d.   Determination of mayoral inability.



      1.   Voluntary declaration of temporary inability. Whenever
the mayor transmits to the official next in line of succession and to the
city clerk, a written declaration that he or she is temporarily unable to
discharge the powers and duties of the office of mayor, such powers and
duties shall devolve upon the official next in line of succession, subject to
the provisions of subdivision a of this section. Thereafter if the mayor
transmits to the acting mayor and to the city clerk a written declaration
that he or she is able to resume the discharge of the powers and duties of
the office of mayor, the mayor shall resume the discharge of such powers and
duties immediately upon the receipt of such declaration by the city clerk.



      2.   Inability committee.



         (a)   There shall be a committee on mayoral inability
consisting of: the corporation counsel, the comptroller, the speaker of the
council, a deputy mayor who shall be designated by the mayor, and the borough
president with the longest consecutive service as borough president. If two
or more borough presidents have served for an equal length of time, one of
such borough presidents shall be selected by lot to be a member of such
committee. If at any time there is no valid mayoral designation in force, the
deputy mayor with the longest consecutive service as a deputy mayor shall be
a member of such committee. The authority to act as a member of such
committee shall not be delegable.



         (b)   Such committee by affirmative declaration of no
fewer than four of its members shall have the power to make the declarations
described in paragraphs four and five of this subdivision. No such
declaration shall be effective unless signed by all the members making it.



       3.   Panel on mayoral inability.



         (a)   There shall be a panel on mayoral inability.
Unless otherwise provided by state law, such panel shall consist of all the
members of the council.



         (b)   The panel shall have the power to make the
determinations described in paragraphs four and five of this subdivision.



      4.   Temporary inability.



         (a)   Whenever the committee on mayoral inability
personally serves or causes to be personally served upon the mayor and
transmits to the official next in line of succession, the members of the
panel on mayoral inability and the city clerk, its written declaration that
the mayor is temporarily unable to discharge the powers and duties of the
office of mayor, together with a statement of its reasons for such
declaration, such declaration shall constitute a determination of temporary
inability unless the mayor, within forty-eight hours after receipt of such
declaration, transmits to the official next in line of succession, the
members of the committee on mayoral inability, the members of the panel on
mayoral inability and the city clerk, a written declaration that he or she is
able to discharge the powers and duties of the office of mayor, together with
responses to the statement by the committee on mayoral inability of its
reasons for its declaration.



         (b)   If personal service of the committee's declaration
upon the mayor cannot be accomplished, or if such service has been
accomplished but the mayor has not transmitted a declaration that he or she
is able to discharge the powers and duties of the office of mayor within
forty-eight hours after receipt of such declaration, such powers and duties
shall devolve upon the official next in line of succession, subject to the
provisions of subdivision a of this section, unless and until the mayor
resumes the authority to discharge such powers pursuant to the provisions of
subparagraphs (e) or (f) of this paragraph.



         (c)   If within such forty-eight hours, the mayor
transmits a declaration that he or she is able to discharge the powers and
duties of the office of mayor, such powers and duties shall not devolve upon
the official next in line of succession and the mayor shall continue to
discharge the powers and duties of the office of mayor, unless and until the
panel on mayoral inability, within twenty-one days after its receipt of the
mayor's declaration, determines by two-thirds vote of all its members that
the mayor is temporarily unable to discharge the powers and duties of the
office of mayor. If the panel determines that the mayor is unable to
discharge the powers and duties of the office of mayor, such powers and
duties shall devolve upon the official next in line of succession, subject to
the provisions of subdivision a of this section, unless and until the mayor
resumes the authority to discharge such powers and duties pursuant to the
provisions of subparagraphs (e) or (f) of this paragraph.



         (d)   If, at any time prior to a final determination by
the panel pursuant to subparagraph (c) of this paragraph the mayor transmits
a voluntary declaration of temporary inability pursuant to the provisions of
paragraph one of this subdivision, to the official next in line of
succession, the members of the committee on mayoral inability, the members of
the panel on mayoral inability, and the city clerk, then the procedures set
forth in paragraph one of this subdivision shall be followed.



         (e)   If a determination of temporary inability has been
made pursuant to the provisions of subparagraphs (a) or (c) of this
paragraph, and if thereafter, the mayor transmits to the acting mayor, the
members of the committee on mayoral inability, the members of the panel on
mayoral inability and the city clerk, a written declaration that he or she is
able to resume the discharge of the powers and duties of the office of mayor,
then the mayor shall resume the discharge of such powers and duties four days
after the receipt of such declaration by the city clerk, unless the committee
on mayoral inability, within such four days, personally serves or causes to
be personally served upon the mayor and transmits to the acting mayor, the
members of the panel on mayoral inability and the city clerk, its written
declaration that the mayor remains unable to discharge the powers and duties
of the office of mayor.



         (f)   If the committee transmits a declaration that the
mayor remains unable to discharge the powers and duties of the office of
mayor, the mayor shall not resume the discharge of the powers and duties of
the office of mayor unless and until the panel on mayoral inability, within
twenty-one days of its receipt of such declaration, determines by two-thirds
vote of all its members that the inability has in fact ceased. Upon such a
determination by the panel, or after the expiration of twenty-one days, if
the panel has not acted, the mayor shall resume the discharge of the powers
and duties of the office of mayor.



      5.   Permanent inability.



         (a)   Whenever the committee on mayoral inability
personally serves or causes to be personally served upon the mayor and
transmits to the official next in line of succession, the members of the
panel on mayoral inability and the city clerk, its declaration that the mayor
is permanently unable to discharge the powers and duties of the office of
mayor, together with its reasons for such declaration, the panel on mayoral
inability shall, within twenty-one days after its receipt of such
declaration, determine whether or not the mayor is permanently unable to
discharge the powers and duties of the office of mayor.



         (b)   If the panel determines by two-thirds vote of all
its members that the mayor is permanently unable to discharge the powers and
duties of the office of mayor, such powers and duties shall devolve upon the
official next in line of succession as acting mayor pursuant to subdivision b
of this section, and the office of mayor shall be deemed vacant.



      6.   Continuation of salary; disability allowance.



         (a)   During the time that any official is acting as
mayor pursuant to a determination of temporary inability, the mayor shall
continue to be paid the salary of the office of mayor, and the acting mayor
shall continue to be paid the salary of the office to which such person was
elected.



         (b)   Any mayor who has been determined to be
permanently unable to discharge the powers and duties of the office of mayor
pursuant to paragraph five of this subdivision shall continue to receive from
the city, a sum which together with the mayor's disability benefits and
retirement allowance, if any, computed without optional modification, shall
equal the annual salary which such mayor was receiving at the time of the
determination of permanent inability. Such disability allowance shall begin
to accrue on the date of the determination of permanent inability and shall
be payable on the first day of each month until the expiration of the term
for which such mayor had been elected or such mayor's death, whichever shall
occur first. Such mayor shall apply for any retirement allowance or
disability benefits to which he or she may be entitled and the disability
allowance provided for in this section shall not reduce or suspend such
retirement allowance or disability benefits, notwithstanding any other
provision of law.



Section 11. Reorganization of agencies under jurisdiction of mayor.



   a.   The agencies existing on the effective date of this section are
continued except as otherwise provided in the charter or as otherwise
provided by state or local law enacted since that date or by any actions
taken by the mayor pursuant to this section since that date. To achieve
effective and efficient functioning and management of city government, the
mayor may organize or reorganize any agency under his jurisdiction, including
the authority to transfer functions from one agency to another; create new
agencies; eliminate existing agencies; and consolidate or merge agencies. Any
action by the mayor pursuant to this subdivision shall be termed a
"reorganization plan" and shall be published in the City Record.



   b.   In preparing reorganization plans, the mayor shall eliminate,
as appropriate, agencies or functions which duplicate or overlap similar
agencies of, or functions performed by, other agencies of city, state or
local government.



   c.   If any proposed reorganization plan involves a change of a
provision of this charter, except as provided pursuant to subdivision f of
this section, or local law now in effect, or otherwise involves
reorganization of an agency created pursuant to a resolution of the board of
estimate or executive order of the mayor, a copy of the reorganization plan
first shall be submitted to the council. Within a period of ninety days from
the date of receipt, the council may adopt a resolution that approves or
disapproves the reorganization plan. In the event the council takes no action
within the ninety-day period, the reorganization plan shall be deemed
approved as if the council had taken affirmative action, and is then
effective.



   d.   The text of a reorganization plan approved pursuant to
subdivision c of this section shall appear as a part of the administrative
code.



   e.   The mayor may withdraw or modify a reorganization plan
submitted to the council before any final action by the council with respect
to it.



   f.   The authority of the mayor pursuant to this section shall not
apply (1) to any matter which would otherwise require the submission of a
local law for the approval of the electors pursuant to section thirty-seven,
or (2) to any board or commission established pursuant to a provision of this
charter.



Section 12. Mayor's management report.



   a.   Not later than January thirtieth in each year the mayor shall
make public and submit to the council a preliminary management report of the
city and not later than September seventeenth in each year the mayor shall
make public and submit to the council a management report.



   b.   The preliminary management report shall contain for each city
agency



      (1)   a statement of actual performance for the first four
months of the current fiscal year relative to the program performance goals
and measures established for such year;



      (2)   proposed program performance goals and measures for the
next fiscal year reflecting budgetary decisions made as of the date of
submission of the preliminary budget;



      (3)   an explanation in narrative and/or tabular form of
significant changes in the program performance goals and measures from the
adopted budget condition to the current budget as modified and from said
modified budget to the preliminary budget statements; and



      (4)   an appendix indicating the relationship between the
program performance goals and measures included in the management report
pursuant to paragraph two of this subdivision and the corresponding
appropriations contained in the preliminary budget.



   c.   The management report shall include a review of the
implementation of the statement of needs as required by subdivision h of
section two hundred four and shall contain for each agency



      (1)   program performance goals for the current fiscal year
and a statement and explanation of performance measures;



      (2)   a statement of actual performance for the entire
previous fiscal year relative to program performance goals;



      (3)   a statement of the status of the agency's internal
control environment and systems, including a summary of any actions taken
during the previous fiscal year, and any actions being taken during the
current fiscal year to strengthen the agency's internal control environment
and system;



      (4)   a summary of rulemaking actions undertaken by the agency
during the past fiscal year including



         (a)   the number of rulemaking actions taken,



         (b)   the number of such actions which were not noticed
in the regulatory agenda prepared for such fiscal year, including a summary
of the reasons such rules were not included in such regulatory agenda, and



         (c)   the number of such actions which were adopted
under the emergency rulemaking procedures;



      (5)   a summary of the procurement actions taken during the
previous fiscal year, including: (i) for each of the procurement methods
specified in section three hundred twelve, the number and dollar value of the
procurement contracts entered into during such fiscal year; and (ii) for all
procurement contracts entered into pursuant to a procurement method other
than that specified in paragraph one of subdivision a of section three
hundred twelve, the number and dollar value of such procurement contracts by
each of the reasons specified in paragraph one of subdivision b of section
three hundred twelve; and



      (6)   an appendix indicating the relationship between the
program performance goals included in the management report pursuant to
paragraph two of this subdivision and the corresponding expenditures made
pursuant to the adopted budget for the previous fiscal year.



   d.   For agencies with local service districts or programs within
community districts and boroughs, the mayor's preliminary management report
and management report insofar as practicable shall include schedules of
agency service goals, performance measures and actual performance relative to
goals for each such local service district or program.



   e.   Prior to April eighth in each year the council shall conduct
public hearings on the preliminary management report and on the proposed
program and performance goals and measures of city agencies contained in such
report. The council shall submit to the mayor and make public not later than
April eighth a report or reports of findings and recommendations.



Section 13. Office of criminal justice.



   There is established in the executive office of the mayor an office of
criminal justice, to be headed by a coordinator of criminal justice appointed
by the mayor. The coordinator shall:



      (1)   advise and assist the mayor in planning for increased
coordination and cooperation among agencies under the jurisdiction of the
mayor that are involved in criminal justice programs and activities;



      (2)   review the budget requests of all agencies for programs
related to criminal justice and recommend to the mayor budget priorities
among such programs; and,



      (3)   perform such other duties as the mayor may assign.



(Am. L.L. 2015/086, 10/7/2015)



Section 13-a. Code of administrative judicial conduct.



   The mayor and the chief administrative law judge of the office of
administrative trials and hearings shall jointly promulgate, and may from
time to time jointly amend, rules establishing a code or codes of
professional conduct governing the activities of all administrative law
judges and hearing officers in city tribunals, except to the extent that such
promulgation would be inconsistent with law. Prior to promulgating or
amending any such rules, the mayor and the chief administrative law judge
shall consult with the conflicts of interest board, the commissioner of
investigation and affected agency and administrative tribunal heads. An
administrative law judge or hearing officer shall be subject to removal or
other disciplinary action for violating such rules in the manner that such
administrative law judge or hearing officer may be removed or otherwise
disciplined under law. Further, such rules may set forth additional sanctions
or penalties for violations of such rules to the extent consistent with law.



Section 13-b. Office of civil justice.



   a.   The mayor shall establish an office of civil justice. Such
office may, but need not, be established in the executive office of the mayor
and may be established as a separate office, within any other office of the
mayor or within any department, the head of which is appointed by the mayor.
Such office shall be headed by a coordinator who shall be appointed by the
mayor or the head of such department. For the purposes of this section only,
"coordinator" shall mean the coordinator of the office of civil justice.



   b.   Powers and duties. The coordinator shall have the power and the
duty to:



      1.   advise and assist the mayor in planning and implementing
for coordination and cooperation among agencies under the jurisdiction of the
mayor that are involved in civil justice programs;



      2.   review the budget requests of all agencies for programs
related to civil justice, and recommend to the mayor budget priorities among
such programs and assist the mayor in prioritizing such requests;



      3.   prepare and submit to the mayor and the council an annual
report of the civil legal service needs of low-income city residents and the
availability of free and low-cost civil legal services to meet such needs,
which shall include but not be limited to (i) an assessment of the civil
legal service needs of such residents, as well as the type and frequency of
civil legal matters, including but not limited to matters concerning housing,
health insurance, medical expenses and debts relating thereto, personal
finances, employment, immigration, public benefits and domestic and family
matters, (ii) identification and assessment of the efficacy and capacity of
free and low-cost civil legal services available for such residents, (iii)
identification of the areas or populations within the city in which
low-income residents with civil legal service needs reside and (iv)
identification of areas or populations within the city that have
disproportionately low access to free and low-cost civil legal services;



      4.   study the effectiveness of, and make recommendations with
respect to, the expansion of (i) free and low-cost civil legal services
programs, (ii) mediation and alternative dispute resolution programs and
(iii) mechanisms for providing free and low-cost civil legal services during
and after emergencies; provided that the coordinator shall, to the extent
practicable, prioritize the study of, and making of recommendations with
respect to, the expansion of free and low-cost civil legal services programs
intended to address housing-related civil legal service needs of low-income
city residents;



      5.   serve as liaison for the city with providers of free and
low-cost civil legal services and coordinate among such providers to (i)
maximize the number of low-income city residents who obtain free and low-cost
civil legal services sufficient to meet the needs of such residents and (ii)
ensure that such residents have access to such services during and after
emergencies;



      6.   provide outreach and education on the availability of
free and low-cost civil legal service programs; and



      7.   perform other duties as the mayor may assign.



   c.   Five-year plan. Within one year after the completion of the
first annual report required by paragraph three of subdivision b of this
section, and in every fifth calendar year thereafter, the coordinator shall
prepare and submit to the mayor and the council a five-year plan for
providing free and low-cost civil legal services to those low-income city
residents who need such services. Such plan shall also identify obstacles to
making such services available to all those who need them and describe what
additional resources would be necessary to do so.



Section 13-c. Municipal division of transitional services.



   a.   The mayor shall establish a municipal division of transitional
services. Such division may, but need not, be established in the executive
office of the mayor or as a separate division or within any other office of
the mayor, or within any department the head of which is appointed by the
mayor. Such division shall be headed by a coordinator who shall be appointed
by the mayor or the head of such department. For the purposes of this
section, "coordinator" shall mean the coordinator of the municipal division
of transitional services.



   b.   Powers and duties. The division shall have the power and the
duty to:



      1.   ensure, by such means as necessary, including
coordination with relevant city agencies, the availability of effective
reentry services to individuals residing in New York city who have been
released from the custody of the New York city department of correction after
having served a period of criminal incarceration or criminal detention and
other individuals in need of reentry services that have served a period of
criminal incarceration or criminal detention;



      2.   create a coordinated system for the administration of
reentry services. Such system shall ensure access to reentry services in
areas where a substantial number of such individuals reside. To the extent
that the coordinator deems appropriate, such system may also include
integration and coordination with similar services provided by other city
agencies, and existing facilities operated by city agencies may be utilized
for the purpose of such integration and coordination;



      3.   administer contracts for the provision of reentry
services as appropriate, and to the extent required by paragraph 1 of this
subdivision, review the budget requests of all agencies for programs related
to reentry services, and recommend to the mayor budget priorities among such
services and assist the mayor in prioritizing such requests;



      4.   provide outreach and education on the availability of
reentry services; and



      5.   perform other duties as the mayor may assign.



   c.   Annual progress report. By October 31, 2017, and by October 31
of every year thereafter, the coordinator shall prepare and submit to the
mayor and council a report of the activities of the division and its progress
in ensuring the delivery of effective reentry services. Such report shall
include the (i) populations served; (ii) types of programs created or
provided and who created or provided such programs; (iii) geographic areas
served; and (iv) outreach efforts.



   d.   Biennial report. By October 31, 2017, and by October 31 of
every second year thereafter, the coordinator shall prepare and submit to the
mayor and the council a report of reentry services for those city residents
who need such services. Such report shall include (i) an assessment of the
reentry service needs of city residents, as well as the type and frequency of
resources needed, including but not limited to matters concerning housing,
health insurance, medical expenses and debts relating thereto, behavioral
health treatment, personal finances, employment, job training, education,
immigration, and public benefits, (ii) identification and assessment of the
efficacy and capacity of existing reentry services available for city
residents, and (iii) identification of the areas or populations within the
city in which city residents with reentry service needs are concentrated and
the corresponding availability of reentry services.



   e.   Four-year plan. Within one year after the completion of the
first biennial report required by subdivision d of this section, and in every
fourth calendar year thereafter, the coordinator shall prepare and submit to
the mayor and the council a four-year plan for providing reentry services to
those city residents who need such services. Such plan may include
recommendations for approaches to serving city residents in need of reentry
services, including the establishment of an initial point of access for
individuals immediately upon their release from the custody of the department
of correction in a location adjacent to Rikers Island or to the correctional
facility that releases the most inmates daily. Such report and plan shall
also identify obstacles to making such services available to all those who
need them and describe what additional resources would be necessary to do so.



(L.L. 2016/103, 8/31/2016, eff. 10/30/2016)



Section 13-d. Office of crime victim services.



   a.   Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms have
the following meanings:



      Coordinator. The term "coordinator" means the crime victim
services coordinator.



      Crime victim. The term "crime victim" means a person who is a
victim of a sex offenses as defined in article 130 of the penal law, robbery
as defined in article 160 of the penal law, assault as defined in article 120
of the penal law, burglary as defined in article 140 of the penal law,
larceny as defined in article 155 of the penal law, domestic violence
offenses as defined in section 530.11(1)(a) of the criminal procedure law, or
any other offense determined by the coordinator.



      Service provider. The term "service provider" means any
non-government organization, funded in whole or in part by the city, or any
agency under the jurisdiction of the mayor, that provides social services to
crime victims, including but not limited to case management, crisis
intervention, legal services, restorative justice, emergency or transitional
shelter, permanent housing, health care, mental health counseling, drug
addiction screening and treatment, language interpretation, public benefits,
domestic and family matters safety planning, job training and economic
empowerment, immigration advocacy or other services which may be offered to
crime victims, provided, however, that social services shall not be construed
to include the provision of services by first responders in response to
public safety incidents.



   b.   The mayor shall establish an office of crime victim services.
Such office may, but need not, be established in the executive office of the
mayor, or may be established as a separate office within any other office of
the mayor, or within any department, the head of which is appointed by the
mayor. Such office shall be headed by a coordinator who shall be appointed by
the mayor or the head of such department.



   c.   Powers and duties. The coordinator shall have the power and the
duty to:



      1.   advise and assist the mayor in planning for increased
coordination and cooperation among service providers to ensure the efficient
delivery of services for crime victims;



      2.   work with the office to end domestic and gender-based
violence to ensure that services for crime victims are coordinated.



      3.   advise and assist the director of the office to end
domestic and gender-based violence in developing methods to improve the
coordination of systems and services for victims of intimate partner violence;



      4.   publish and annually update a directory of service
providers in the city, organized by service type, location of services, hours
of operation, contact information, eligibility criteria for services,
language access, any specific cultural competencies, and accessibility.
Notwithstanding this paragraph, the coordinator shall not be required to
publish the location of services that could compromise the safety of the
victim;



      5.   compile information on the nature of services the service
providers have contracted with the city to provide for crime victims;



      6.   prepare and submit to the mayor and the council an annual
report of service providers which shall include: (a) the nature of assistance
to crime victims provided by such service providers; and (b) an assessment of
the need for increased coordination for such crime victims;



      7.   make recommendations with respect to the coordination of
services;



      8.   provide outreach and education on the availability of
services for crime victims; and



      9.   perform other duties as the mayor may assign.



(L.L. 2016/162, 12/6/2016, eff. 4/5/2017; Am. L.L. 2019/038, 2/24/2019)



Section 14. Office of veteran' affairs. [Repealed]



Editor's note: former Section 14, "Office of veterans' affairs," was repealed
effective 4/8/2016. A new Department of Veterans' Services was established as
of that date. See L.L. 2015/113, 12/10/2015, and Chapter 75 herein.



(Repealed L.L. 2015/113, 12/10/2015, eff. 4/8/2016)



Section 15. Office of operations.



   a.   There shall be, in the executive office of the mayor, an office
of operations. The office shall be headed by a director, who shall be
appointed by the mayor.



   b.   The director of the office of operations shall have the power
and the duty to:



      1.   plan, coordinate and oversee the management of city
governmental operations to promote the efficient and effective delivery of
agency services;



      2.   review and report on the city's management organization
including productivity and performance functions and systems;



      3.   maintain for the mayor a management, planning and
reporting system and direct the operation of such system;



      4.   review the city's operations and make recommendations,
where appropriate, for improving productivity, measuring performance and
reducing operating expenses; and



      5.   perform the functions of an office of environmental
coordination and provide assistance to all city agencies in fulfilling their
environmental review responsibilities for proposed actions by the city
subject to such review.



   c.   There shall be an office of the language services coordinator
within the office of operations. Within appropriations therefor, the office
of the language services coordinator shall appoint such experts and
assistants as necessary to fulfill the duties assigned to the office by this
charter, in consultation with the office of immigrant affairs. The office of
the language services coordinator shall have the following powers and duties:



      1.   To work with each agency subject to the requirements of
section 23-1102 of the code on the development and implementation of its
agency-specific language access implementation plan to ensure meaningful
access to information and direct public services.



      2.   To collect annual reports from each such agency regarding
implementation of its language access implementation plan.



      3.   To perform outreach, in coordination with the office of
immigrant affairs or other agencies, in neighborhoods containing a
significant number of persons that do not speak any of the languages already
covered by most agencies' language access implementation plans, but which
might otherwise contain a likely service population, to inquire what agency
direct public services, as defined in section 23-1101 of the code, might be
used by such persons if services in a language spoken by such persons were
available, and collect information therefrom to be shared with the relevant
agencies.



      4.   To make recommendations to city agencies on specific
programs for which the providing of language access services in languages not
already required pursuant to section 23-1102 of the code may be beneficial.



      5.   Beginning no later than June 30, 2018, and no later than
every June 30 thereafter, submit to the city council and post on the city
website a report providing information regarding each agency subject to the
requirements of section 23-1102, including:



         (i)   the name of the individual designated as the
agency's language access coordinator, including all titles held by such
individual;



         (ii)   the agency's language access implementation plan,
to be updated every three years unless such implementation plan has been
updated by such agency since it was last reported;



         (iii)   information regarding how members of the public
may submit language access complaints, questions and requests to the agency;



         (iv)   data on complaints and requests received pursuant
to section 23-301 of the code and a description of how such complaints and
requests were addressed;



         (v)   a copy of the list of designated citywide
languages, created pursuant to section 23-1101 of the code, as well as the
data relied upon for its creation;



         (vi)   information regarding the outreach conducted
pursuant to paragraph 3 of this subdivision; and



      6.   To provide technical assistance to such city agencies in
meeting the requirements of section 23-1102 of the code.



      7.   To monitor and report on the performance of city agencies
in delivering services in languages other than English, including but not
limited to compliance with signage requirements, the availability of
interpretation services, the familiarity of frontline workers with language
access policy and reviews of translated documents for accuracy and
availability.



      8.   To maintain in a central place which is accessible to the
public a library of written materials published by city agencies in such
languages.



      9.   To establish, in furtherance of the purposes of this
subdivision and of chapter 11 of the code, additional standards and criteria
for city agencies that provide language access services.



   d.    1.   The city of New York recognizes that services for
people suffering from mental retardation and developmental disabilities are
provided by programs administered within a number of different city agencies,
as well as by non-governmental entities. The city of New York further
recognizes the need for coordination and cooperation among city agencies and
between city agencies and non-governmental entities that provide such
services.



      2.   There shall be mental retardation and developmental
disability coordination within the office of operations. In performing
functions relating to such coordination, the office of operations shall be
authorized to develop methods to: (i) improve the coordination within and
among city agencies that provide services to people with mental retardation
or developmental disabilities, including but not limited to the department of
health and mental hygiene, the administration for children's services, the
human resources administration, department of youth and community
development, the department of juvenile justice, and the department of
employment, or the successors to such agencies, and the health and hospitals
corporation and the board of education; and (ii) facilitate coordination
between such agencies and non-governmental entities providing services to
people with mental retardation or developmental disabilities; review state
and federal programs and legislative proposals that may affect people with
mental retardation or developmental disabilities and provide information and
advice to the mayor regarding the impact of such programs or legislation;
recommend legislative proposals or other initiatives that will benefit people
with mental retardation or developmental disabilities; and perform such other
duties and functions as the mayor may request to assist people with mental
retardation or developmental disabilities and their family members.



   e.   There shall be a director of environmental remediation within
the office of operations. The director, who shall be appointed by the mayor,
shall head the office of environmental remediation and shall have the power
and the duty to:



      1.   in consultation with other city agencies and officials,
including the department of health and mental hygiene, as appropriate, plan,
establish, coordinate, and oversee city policy regarding the identification,
investigation, remediation, and redevelopment of brownfields that is
protective of public health and the environment, and supportive of the city's
economic development;



      2.   develop programs for sustainable growth in consultation
with the office of long-term planning and sustainability. Such programs shall
focus on projects that are consistent with brownfield opportunity area plans
and on communities that (i) contain a disproportionate number of brownfield
sites, (ii) show indicators of economic distress, including low resident
incomes, high unemployment, high commercial vacancy rates and depressed
property values, or (iii) contain brownfield sites that present strategic
opportunities to stimulate economic development, community revitalization or
the siting of public amenities.



      3.   identify and catalogue brownfields and potential
brownfields;



      4.   develop and administer a local brownfield cleanup program
to facilitate the identification, investigation, remediation, and
redevelopment of brownfields in support of the city's economic development;



      5.   develop and administer financial and other incentive
programs to encourage public or private entities to identify, investigate,
remediate, and redevelop brownfields in support of the city's economic
development. The financial incentive program shall give priority to projects
that are consistent with brownfield opportunity area plans;



      6.   promote community participation and community assistance,
and provide technical support for community participation, in the
identification, investigation, remediation, and redevelopment of brownfields
in support of the city's economic development;



      7.   educate and train community groups, developers, and
property owners about the identification, investigation, remediation, and
redevelopment of brownfields in support of the city's economic development;



      8.   act as intermediary for city agencies and officials, as
appropriate, for brownfield matters, including with respect to the state
brownfield opportunity area program. The office shall facilitate interactions
among city agencies, community based organizations, developers, and
environmental experts and assist community based organizations in brownfield
redevelopment.



      9.   support the efforts of community groups, developers, and
property owners to obtain and utilize federal, state, and private incentives
to identify, investigate, remediate, and redevelop brownfields;



      10.   coordinate, partner, and enter into agreements with
federal and state agencies and officials and other entities in connection
with the identification, investigation, remediation, and redevelopment of
brownfields in support of the city's economic development. Such agreements
may include a pledge by a federal or state agency or official that no further
action may be taken against a local brownfield site that has been issued a
certificate of completion pursuant to chapter nine of title twenty-four of
the administrative code;



      11.   apply for and administer funds for the identification,
investigation, remediation, and redevelopment of brownfields in support of
the city's economic development;



      12.   advise city agencies and officials regarding the
identification, investigation, remediation, and redevelopment of brownfields
in support of the city's economic development;



      13.   evaluate and report publicly on progress in the
identification, investigation, remediation, and redevelopment of brownfields
in support of the city's economic development;



      14.   take such other actions as may be necessary to
facilitate the identification, investigation, remediation, and redevelopment
of brownfields in support of the city's economic development, including the
review and acceptance of remedial plans for brownfield redevelopment projects
such as city-sponsored affordable housing projects;



      15.   administer the E-Designation program, as defined in
section 11-15 of the zoning resolution of the city of New York, acting as
successor to the department of environmental protection for such purpose;



      16.   ensure compliance with hazardous waste restrictive
declarations arising from the environmental review of land use actions,
acting as successor to the department of environmental protection for such
purpose;



      17.   establish fees for programs administered by the office;
and



      18.   promulgate such rules as are necessary to implement the
provisions of this subdivision.



   f.   1.   The office of operations shall develop a business
owner's bill of rights. The bill of rights shall be in the form of a written
document, drafted in plain language, that advises business owners of their
rights as they relate to agency inspections. Such written document shall
include translations of the bill of rights into at least the six languages
most commonly spoken by limited English proficient individuals, as those
languages are determined by the department of city planning. The bill of
rights shall include, but not be limited to, notice of every business owner's
right to: i) consistent enforcement of agency rules; ii) compliment or
complain about an inspector or inspectors online, anonymously, if desired,
through a customer service survey, and information sufficient to allow a
business owner to do so, including but not limited to the URL of such survey;
iii) contest a notice of violation before the relevant local tribunal, if
any; iv) an inspector who behaves in a professional and courteous manner; v)
an inspector who can answer reasonable questions relating to the inspection,
or promptly makes an appropriate referral; vi) an inspector with a sound
knowledge of the applicable laws, rules and regulations; vii) access
information in languages other than English; and viii) request language
interpretation services for agency inspections of the business.



      2.   To the extent practicable, the office of operations shall
develop and implement a plan to distribute the bill of rights to all relevant
business owners, including via electronic publication on the internet, and to
notify such business owners if the bill of rights is subsequently updated or
revised. The office of operations shall also develop and implement a plan in
cooperation with all relevant agencies to facilitate distribution of a
physical copy of the bill of rights to business owners or managers at the
time of an inspection, except that if the inspection is an undercover
inspection or if the business owner or manager is not present at the time of
the inspection, then a copy of the bill of rights shall be provided as soon
as practicable.



      3.   To the extent practicable, the office of operations shall
develop and implement a plan for each business owner to indicate the language
in which such owner would prefer that agency inspections of the business be
conducted. To the extent practicable, the office of operations shall also
develop and implement a plan to inform all relevant agencies of such
respective language preference.



      4.   The bill of rights shall serve as an informational
document only and nothing in this subdivision or in such document shall be
construed so as to create a cause of action or constitute a defense in any
legal, administrative, or other proceeding.



   g.   1.   The office of operations shall develop a standardized
customer service training curriculum to be used, to the extent practicable,
by relevant agencies for training agency inspectors. Such training shall be
reviewed annually and updated as needed, taking into account feedback
received through the customer service survey created and maintained by the
office on the city's website pursuant to subdivision h of this section. Such
training shall include specific protocols for such inspectors to follow when
interacting with non-English speakers to ensure that such inspectors provide
language translation services during inspections. Such training shall also
include culturally competent instruction on communicating effectively with
immigrants and non-English speakers during inspections. For purposes of this
subdivision, relevant agencies shall include the department of buildings, the
department of consumer affairs, the department of health and mental hygiene,
the department of environmental protection, the department of sanitation, and
the bureau of fire prevention of the fire department.



      2.   The office of operations shall review each relevant
agency's inspector training program to ensure that such program includes
customer service training and, to the extent practicable, includes the
standardized customer service training curriculum developed by the office of
operations pursuant to paragraph one of this subdivision. After completing
such review, the office of operations shall certify an agency's inspector
training program if it includes, to the extent practicable, the standardized
customer service training curriculum developed by the office of operations
pursuant to paragraph one of this subdivision. Any such certification shall
be provided to the speaker of the council upon request.



      3.   No later than July 1, 2013, the office of operations
shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council a copy of the
standardized customer service training curriculum developed pursuant to
paragraph one of this subdivision and shall report the number of agency
inspector training programs reviewed by the office of operations and the
number of such programs that were certified. No later than January 1, 2014
and annually thereafter, the office of operations shall submit to the mayor
and the speaker of the council any substantive changes to the standardized
customer service training curriculum and shall report the number of agency
inspector training programs that were reviewed and the number of such
programs that were certified by the office of operations during the prior
year.



      4.   If, on September 1, 2017, September 1, 2019, or September
1, 2021 the office of operations has received fewer than 500 responses with
respect to relevant agencies through the customer service survey created and
maintained by the office on the city's website pursuant to subdivision h of
this section in the previous twenty-four-month period, the office of
operations shall perform outreach to businesses that were inspected by
relevant agencies during such period to solicit feedback and to encourage the
owners of such businesses to complete such customer service survey. Such
outreach shall continue until the office of operations has received a total
of at least 500 such responses, including both responses received during such
twenty-four-month period and responses received after such twenty-four-month
period during the period the office of operations is required to perform
outreach, provided that the office of operations shall not be required to
perform outreach for more than three months following such twenty-four-month
period.



   h.   The office of operations shall create and maintain a customer
service survey on the city's website that allows business owners to provide
feedback on their experiences interacting with, at a minimum, inspectors from
relevant agencies, as such term is defined in subdivision g of this section.
Such business owners shall have the option of providing such feedback
anonymously.



   i.   1.   The department of social services, the administration
for children’s services, the department of homeless services, the
department of health and mental hygiene, the department for the aging, the
department for youth and community development, the department of education
and any other agencies designated by the mayor that directly or by contract
collect demographic information via form documents from city residents
seeking social services shall provide all persons seeking such services with
a standardized, anonymous and voluntary demographics information survey form
that contains questions regarding ancestry and languages spoken.



      2.   The questions shall include options allowing respondents
to select from:



         (a)   at least the top 30 largest ancestry groups and
languages spoken in the city of New York based on data from the United States
census bureau; and



         (b)   “other,” with an option to write in a response.



      3.   Such survey form shall be created by the office of
operations and office of immigrant affairs, or such offices or agencies as
may be designated by the mayor, and may be updated as deemed necessary by
those agencies based on changing demographics.



      4.   Beginning no later than six months after the effective
date of the local law that added this subdivision, and annually thereafter,
the office of operations, or the office or agency designated by the mayor,
shall conduct a review of all forms issued by the agencies described in
paragraph 1 of this subdivision and any other agencies so designated by the
mayor that: collect demographic information addressing the questions
contained on the survey form, are completed by persons seeking services and
contain content and/or language in relation to collecting such information
that is within the administering city agency's authority to edit or amend.
The office of operations, or the office or agency designated by the mayor,
shall submit to the council, within 60 days of such review, a list of all
forms reviewed and all forms eligible for updating, and for forms not
eligible for updating an explanation of why such forms are not eligible for
updating, and indicate which forms shall be updated. When practicable, when
such forms are updated they shall request voluntary responses to questions
about ancestry and languages spoken. All forms identified as eligible for
updating during the review required pursuant to this paragraph shall be
updated to invite responses to questions about ancestry and languages spoken
no later than five years from the effective date of the local law that added
this subdivision. All forms not eligible for updating shall be provided in
conjunction with the standardized, anonymous and voluntary demographics
information survey form as established by paragraph 1 of subdivision i of
this section.



      5.   Beginning no later than 18 months after the effective
date of the local law that added this subdivision, and annually thereafter,
the office of operations, or the office or agency designated by the mayor,
shall make available to the public data for the prior fiscal year that
includes but is not limited to the total number of individuals who have
identified their ancestry or languages spoken on the survey form described in
paragraph 1 of this subdivision and any forms updated pursuant to paragraph 4
of this subdivision, disaggregated by response option, agency and program.
Such data shall be made available to the public through the single web portal
provided for in section 23-502 of the administrative code.



      6.   Each agency that provides the survey form required
pursuant to paragraph 1 of this subdivision shall evaluate its provision of
services in consideration of the data collected pursuant to this subdivision
and the office of operations, or the office or agency designated by the
mayor, shall submit to the council a report on any new or modified services
developed by any agencies based on such data. Such report shall be submitted
no earlier than 18 months after the effective date of the local law that
added this paragraph.



      7.   No information that is otherwise required to be reported
pursuant to this section shall be reported in a manner that would violate any
applicable provision of federal, state or local law relating to the privacy
of information respecting students and families serviced by the New York city
department of education. If any category requested contains between 1 and 5,
or allows another category to be narrowed to between 1 and 5, the number
shall be replaced with a symbol.



   j.   1.   The department of social services, the administration
for children's services, the department of homeless services, the department
of health and mental hygiene, the department for the aging, the department
for youth and community development, the department of education and any
other agencies designated by the mayor that directly or by contract collect
demographic information via form documents from city residents seeking social
services shall provide all persons seeking such services with a standardized,
anonymous and voluntary demographic information survey form that contains an
option for multiracial ancestry or ethnic origin. Such survey form shall be
created by the office of operations and office of immigrant affairs, or such
offices or agencies as may be designated by the mayor, and may be updated as
deemed necessary by those agencies based on changing demographics.



      2.   Beginning no later than six months after the effective
date of the local law that added this subdivision, and annually thereafter,
the office of operations, or an office or agency designated by the mayor,
shall conduct a review of all forms issued by the agencies described in
paragraph 1 of this subdivision and any other agencies so designated by the
mayor that: collect demographic information addressing the questions
contained on the survey form, are completed by persons seeking services and
contain content and/or language in relation to collecting such information
that is within the administering city agency's authority to edit or amend.
The office of operations, or the office or agency designated by the mayor,
shall submit to the council, within 60 days of such review, a list of all
forms reviewed and all forms eligible for updating, and for forms not
eligible for updating an explanation of why such forms are not eligible for
updating, and indicate which forms shall be updated. When practicable, the
office of operations, or the office or agency designated by the mayor, shall
ensure that when such forms are updated they shall request voluntary
responses to questions about multiracial ancestry or ethnic origin. All forms
identified as eligible for updating during the review required pursuant to
this paragraph shall be updated to invite responses to questions about
multiracial ancestry or ethnic origin no later than five years from the
effective date of the local law that added this subdivision. All forms not
eligible for updating shall be provided in conjunction with the standardized,
anonymous and voluntary demographics information survey form as established
by paragraph 1 of subdivision j of this section.



      3.   Beginning no later than 18 months after the effective
date of the local law that added this subdivision, and annually thereafter,
the office of operations, or the office or agency designated by the mayor,
shall make available to the public data for the prior fiscal year that
includes but is not limited to the total number of individuals who have
identified their multiracial ancestry or ethnic origin on the survey form
described in paragraph 1 of this subdivision and any forms updated pursuant
to paragraph 4 of this subdivision, disaggregated by response option, agency
and program. Such data shall be made available to the public through the
single web portal provided for in section 23-502 of the administrative code.



      4.   Each agency that provides the survey form required
pursuant to paragraph 1 of this subdivision shall evaluate its provision of
services in consideration of the data collected pursuant to this subdivision
and the office of operations, or the office or agency designated by the
mayor, shall submit to the council a report on any new or modified services
developed by any agencies based on such data. Such report shall be submitted
no earlier than 18 months after the effective date of the local law that
added this paragraph.



      5.   No information that is otherwise required to be reported
pursuant to this section shall be reported in a manner that would violate any
applicable provision of federal, state or local law relating to the privacy
of information respecting students and families serviced by the New York city
department of education. If any category requested contains between 1 and 5,
or allows another category to be narrowed to between 1 and 5, the number
shall be replaced with a symbol.



   k.   1.   The department of social services, the administration
for children’s services, the department of homeless services, the
department of health and mental hygiene, the department for the aging, the
department for youth and community development, the department of education
and any other agencies designated by the mayor that directly or by contract
collect demographic information via form documents from city residents
seeking social services shall provide all persons seeking such services who
are either at least 14 years old or identify as the heads of their own
households with a standardized, anonymous and voluntary demographics
information survey form that contains questions regarding sexual orientation,
including heterosexual, lesbian, gay, bisexual or asexual status or other,
with an option to write in a response and gender identity, including
transgender, cisgender or intersex status or other, with an option to write
in a response.



      2.   Such survey form shall be created by the office of
operations and office of immigrant affairs, or such offices or agencies as
may be designated by the mayor, and may be updated as deemed necessary by
those agencies based on changing demographics.



      3.   No later than 60 days after the effective date of the
local law that added this subdivision, the office of operations shall submit
to the mayor and the speaker of the city council a plan to provide a
mandatory training program and develop a manual for agency staff on how to
invite persons served by such agencies to complete the survey. Such training
and manual shall include, but not be limited to, the following:



         (a)   an overview of the categories of sexual
orientation and gender identity;



         (b)   providing constituents the option of completing
the survey in a private space and filling out any paperwork without oral
guidance from city agency staff;



         (c)   explaining to constituents that completing the
survey is voluntary;



         (d)   explaining to constituents that any data collected
from such survey will not be connected to the individual specifically; and



         (e)   discussions regarding addressing constituents by
their self-identified gender.



      4.   Beginning no later than six months after the effective
date of the local law that added this subdivision, and annually thereafter,
the office of operations, or the office or agency designated by the mayor,
shall conduct a review of all forms issued by the agencies described in
paragraph 1 of this subdivision and any other agencies so designated by the
mayor that: collect demographic information addressing the questions
contained on the survey form, are completed by persons seeking services and
contain content and/or language in relation to collecting such information
that is within the administering city agency's authority to edit or amend.
The office of operations, or the office or agency designated by the mayor,
shall submit to the council within 60 days of such review, a list of all
forms reviewed and all forms eligible for updating, and for forms not
eligible for updating an explanation of why such forms are not eligible for
updating, and indicate which forms shall be updated. When practicable, when
such forms are updated they shall request voluntary responses to questions
about sexual orientation, including heterosexual, lesbian, gay, bisexual or
asexual status, or other; gender identity, including transgender, cisgender
and intersex status or other; and the gender pronoun or pronouns that an
individual identifies with and that others should use when talking to or
about that individual. All forms identified as eligible for updating during
the review required pursuant to this paragraph shall be updated to invite
responses to questions about sexual orientation, gender identity and the
gender pronoun or pronouns that an individual identifies with and that others
should use when talking to or about that individual no later than five years
from the effective date of the local law that added this subdivision. All
forms not eligible for updating shall be provided in conjunction with the
standardized, anonymous and voluntary demographics information survey form as
established by paragraph 1 of subdivision k of this section.



      5.   Beginning no later than 18 months after the effective
date of the local law that added this subdivision, and annually thereafter,
the office of operations, or the office or agency designated by the mayor,
shall make available to the public data for the prior fiscal year that
includes but is not limited to the total number of individuals who have
identified their sexual orientation or gender identity on the survey form
described in paragraph 1 of this subdivision and any forms updated pursuant
to paragraph 4 of this subdivision, disaggregated by response option, agency
and program. Such data shall be made available to the public through the
single web portal provided for in section 23-502 of the administrative code.



      6.   Each agency that provides the survey form required
pursuant to paragraph 1 of this subdivision shall evaluate its provision of
services in consideration of the data collected pursuant to this local law
and the office of operations shall submit to the council a report on any new
or modified services developed by any agencies based on such data. Such
report shall be submitted no earlier than 18 months after the effective date
of the local law that added this paragraph.



      7.   No information that is otherwise required to be reported
pursuant to this section shall be reported in a manner that would violate any
applicable provision of federal, state or local law relating to the privacy
of information respecting students and families serviced by the New York city
department of education. If any category requested contains between 1 and 5,
or allows another category to be narrowed to between 1 and 5, the number
shall be replaced with a symbol.



(Am. L.L. 2015/065, 6/29/2015, eff. 7/29/2015; Am. L.L. 2015/067, 6/29/2015,
eff. 7/29/2015; Am. L.L. 2016/126, 10/31/2016, eff. 4/29/2017; Am. L.L.
2016/127, 10/31/2016, eff. 4/29/2017; Am. L.L. 2016/128, 10/31/2016, eff.
4/29/2017; Am. L.L. 2017/030, 3/18/2017, eff. 7/1/2017; Am. L.L. 2018/076,
1/19/2018)



Editor's note: division g.4. of this Section 15 shall expire and be deemed
repealed on 12/31/2021; see L.L. 2015/067 § 5.



Section 16. Report on social indicators and equity.



   a.   For purposes of this section, the term "gender" includes actual
or perceived sex and shall also include a person's gender identity,
self-image, appearance, behavior, or expression, whether or not that gender
identity, self-image, appearance, behavior or expression is different from
that traditionally associated with the legal sex assigned to that person at
birth. The mayor shall submit an annual report to the council, borough
presidents, and community boards analyzing the social, economic and
environmental health of the city, including any disparities among populations
including gender, racial groups, income groups and, sexual orientation, where
relevant data is available, and proposing strategies for addressing the
issues raised in such analysis. The report shall present and analyze data on
the social, economic and environmental conditions, and gender, racial, and
income disparities, and, disparities relating to sexual orientation, as
available, as well as other disparities as may be identified by the mayor
within such conditions, which may include, national origin, citizenship
status, age, and disability status, where relevant data is available, which
are significantly related to the jurisdiction of the agencies responsible for
the services specified in section twenty seven hundred four, the health and
hospitals corporation, and such other agencies as the mayor shall from time
to time specify. The report shall include the generally accepted indices of
economic security and mobility, poverty, education, child welfare, housing
affordability and quality, homelessness, health, physical environment,
transportation, criminal justice and policing, civic participation, public
employment and such other indices as the mayor shall require by executive
order or the council shall require by local law, including where possible
generally accepted data or indices regarding gender, racial, and income-based
disparities and disparities relating to sexual orientation, as available,
within each indexed category of information, in addition to disparities based
upon other population characteristics that may be identified by the mayor.
Such report shall be submitted no later than sixty days before the community
boards are required to submit budget priorities pursuant to section two
hundred thirty and shall contain: (1) the reasonably available statistical
data, for the current and previous five years, on such conditions in the city
and, where possible, in its subdivisions disaggregated by gender, racial
group, and income group, and sexual orientation to the extent that such data
is available; and a comparison of this data with such relevant national,
regional or other standards or averages as the mayor deems appropriate; (2) a
narrative discussion of the differences and the disparities in such
conditions by gender, racial group and income group, and sexual orientation,
as available, and among the subdivisions of the city and of the changes over
time in such conditions; and (3) the mayor's short and long term plans,
organized by agency or by issue, for responding to the significant problems
and disparities evidenced by the data presented in the report.



   b.   No later than March thirty-first of each year, the mayor shall
submit an annual report to the council, borough presidents and community
boards that shall contain (1) a description of the city's efforts to reduce
the rate of poverty in the city as determined by the poverty measure and
poverty threshold established by the New York city center for economic
opportunity or its successor or by an analogous measure based upon the
recommendations of the national academy of sciences; (2) information on the
number and percentage of city residents living below the poverty threshold
and the number and percentage of city residents living between one hundred
one percent and one hundred fifty percent of the poverty threshold; (3)
poverty data disaggregated by generally accepted indices of family
composition, ethnic and racial groups, age ranges, employment status, and
educational background, and by borough for the most recent year for which
data is available and by neighborhood for the most recent five year average
for which data is available, along with a comparison of this data with such
relevant national, regional or other standards or averages as deemed
appropriate; (4) budgetary data, with a description of and outcomes on the
programs and resources allocated to reduce the poverty rate in the city and
estimates on the poverty reducing effects of major public benefit programs
available throughout the city and how such programs serve key subgroups of
the city's population including, but not limited to, children under the age
of eighteen, the working poor, young persons age sixteen to twenty-four,
families with children, and residents age sixty-five or older; and (5) a
description of the city's short and long term plans to reduce poverty.



(L.L. 2017/177, 9/8/2017)



Section 17. Strategic policy statement.



   a.   On or before the fifteenth day of November of nineteen hundred
ninety, and every four years thereafter, the mayor shall submit a preliminary
strategic policy statement for the city to the borough presidents, council,
and community boards. Such preliminary statement shall include: (i) a summary
of the most significant long-term issues faced by the city; (ii) policy goals
related to such issues; and (iii) proposed strategies for meeting such goals.
In preparing the statement of strategic policy, the mayor shall consider the
strategic policy statements prepared by the borough presidents pursuant to
subdivision fourteen of section eighty-two.



   b.   On or before the first day of February of nineteen hundred
ninety-one, and every four years thereafter, the mayor shall submit a final
strategic policy statement for the city to the borough presidents, council
and community boards. The final statement shall include such changes and
revisions as the mayor deems appropriate after reviewing the comments
received on the preliminary strategic policy statement.



Section 18. Office of immigrant affairs.



   a.   The city recognizes that a large percentage of its inhabitants
were born abroad or are the children of parents who were born abroad and that
the well-being and safety of the city is put in jeopardy if the people of the
city do not seek medical treatment for illnesses that may be contagious, do
not cooperate with the police when they witness a crime or do not avail
themselves of city services to educate themselves and their children. It is
therefore desirable that the city promote the utilization of city services by
all its residents, including foreign-born inhabitants, speakers of foreign
languages and undocumented immigrants.



   b.   In furtherance of the policies stated in subdivision a of this
section, there shall be established in the executive office of the mayor an
office of immigrant affairs. The office shall be headed by a director, who
shall be appointed by the mayor. The director of the office of immigrant
affairs shall have the power and the duty to:



      1.   advise and assist the mayor and the council in developing
and implementing policies designed to assist immigrants and speakers of
languages other than English in the city, in consultation with the office of
the language services coordinator with respect to language accessibility;



      2.   enhance the accessibility of city programs, benefits, and
services to immigrants and speakers of languages other than English by
establishing outreach programs in conjunction with other city agencies and
the council to inform and educate immigrants and speakers of languages other
than English of relevant city programs, benefits, and services;



      3.   perform policy analysis and make recommendations
concerning immigrant affairs; and



      4.   perform such other duties and functions as may be
appropriate to pursue the policies set forth in this section.



   c.   Any service provided by a city agency shall be made available
to all immigrants who are otherwise eligible for such service to the same
extent such service is made available to citizens unless such agency is
required by law to deny eligibility for such service.



   d.   The director, or such other office or agency as the mayor may
designate, shall have the power and the duty to:



      1.   conduct research and advise the mayor and council on
challenges faced by immigrants and speakers of languages other than English,
including, but not limited to, obstacles to accessing city programs,
benefits, and services, and on socioeconomic trends related to such persons;



      2.   establish a state and federal affairs unit within the
office to monitor and conduct analysis on state and federal laws, policies,
enforcement tactics, and case law regarding issues relating to and impacting
immigrant affairs, including potential strategies for addressing such
developments;



      3.   consult with relevant agencies on implementation of
sections of the charter and the administrative code that are relevant to
immigrants;



      4.   consult with and provide information and advice to the
office of civil justice and relevant city agencies in determining and
responding to the legal service needs of immigrants and the availability of
free and low-cost civil legal services to meet such needs, in accordance with
section 13-b;



      5.   participate in interagency efforts, as appropriate,
relating to the handling of confidential information about individuals held
by city agencies and those contracting with city agencies;



      6.   solicit community and stakeholder input regarding the
activities of the office, including but not limited to the office’s
consultations with relevant agencies on implementation of sections of the
charter and the administrative code that are relevant to immigrants; and



      7.   consult with and provide information and advice to
relevant city agencies, in coordination, as appropriate, with the office to
end domestic and gender-based violence, the office of criminal justice, and
other agencies or offices as the mayor may designate, on addressing the
unique needs of immigrant crime victims and witnesses, including agency
standards and protocols for issuing law enforcement certifications required
in order to apply for nonimmigrant status under subparagraphs (T) and (U) of
paragraph (15) of subsection (a) of section 1101 of title 8 of the United
States code, or successor statutes.



   e.   All city agencies shall cooperate with the office and provide
information and assistance as requested; provided, however, no information
that is otherwise required to be provided pursuant to this section shall be
disclosed in a manner that would violate any applicable provision of federal,
state, or local law relating to the privacy of information or that would
interfere with law enforcement investigations or otherwise conflict with the
interests of law enforcement.



   f.   No later than March 15, 2018, and each March 15 thereafter, the
office shall provide to the speaker of the council and post on the office’s
website a report regarding the city’s immigrant population and the
activities of the office during the previous calendar year, including, but
not limited to the following information, where such information is available:



      1.   the size and composition of such population, including,
but not limited to demographic information, socio-economic markers, and
estimates of the immigration status held by members of such population, if
any;



      2.   information regarding the needs of such population
including, but not limited to, social services, legal services, housing,
public benefits, education, and workforce development needs;



      3.   information regarding barriers faced by such population
in accessing such services, and recommendations on how the city could address
such barriers;



      4.   information and metrics relating to each programmatic
initiative of the office, including initiatives that are conducted in
partnership with other offices or agencies, including but not limited to:



         (a)   total program capacity, disaggregated by service
type;



         (b)   number of intakes or program eligibility
screenings conducted;



         (c)   number of individuals served, disaggregated by
service type;



         (d)   number of matters handled, and aggregate data on
the outcomes achieved, disaggregated by service type; and



         (e)   with respect to legal services initiatives, number
of cases accepted for legal advice and full representation, as well as the
number of cases referred to other legal services providers, disaggregated by
service and case type, and aggregate data on the outcomes achieved in cases
accepted for full representation during the reporting window.



      5.   for relevant agencies, information regarding requests for
law enforcement certifications required in order to apply for nonimmigrant
status under subparagraphs (T) and (U) of paragraph (15) of subsection (a) of
section 1101 of title 8 of the United States code, or successor statutes,
including, but not limited to, number of requests for certification received,
request processing times, number of certifications issued, number of
certification requests denied and information as to why, and number of
request appeals and outcomes, disaggregated by agency;



      6.   the efforts of the office to monitor agency efficacy in
conducting outreach and serving the immigrant population, including the
efforts of the task force established pursuant to subdivision g of this
section; and



      7.   the efforts of the director, or such other office or
agency as designated by the mayor, in fulfilling the duties set forth in
subdivision d of this section.



   g.   1.   There is hereby established an interagency task force
on immigrant affairs to ensure interagency communication and coordination on
issues relating to and impacting immigrant affairs. Such task force shall:



         (i)   review and make recommendations to relevant
agencies on implementation of sections of the charter and the administrative
code that are relevant to immigrants;



         (ii)   review legal and policy developments presented by
the state and federal affairs unit in the office and their potential impact
on city agencies;



         (iii)   review and make recommendations to address
obstacles to accessing city programs, benefits, and services;



         (iv)   review and make recommendations to address the
unique needs of particularly vulnerable immigrant populations, including, but
not limited to, victims of crime, domestic violence, and human trafficking;
individuals who are lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, or intersex;
individuals involved in the criminal justice system; and minors;



         (v)   review the solicitation and consideration of
community and stakeholder input received by the office pursuant to paragraph
6 of subdivision d of this section; and



         (vi)   perform such other functions as may be
appropriate in furtherance of the policies set forth in this chapter.



      2.   Such task force shall be led by the director, or by the
head of such other officer or agency as the mayor may designate, and shall
include at a minimum:



         (a)   the commissioners of the following agencies or
offices or such commissioners’ designees:



            (1)   the administration for children’s services;



            (2)   department of social services;



            (3)   department of homeless services;



            (4)   department of health and mental hygiene;



            (5)   department of youth and community
development;



            (6)   department for the aging;



            (7)   police department;



            (8)   department of correction; and



            (9)   department of probation;



         (b)   the chancellor of the city school district, or
their designee;



         (c)   the coordinator of the office of civil justice, or
their designee; and



         (d)   representatives of other such agencies or offices
as the mayor may designate.



      3.   Such task force shall meet regularly in furtherance of
its functions and at any other time at the request of the director or other
designated task force leader.



(Am. L.L. 2017/030, 3/18/2017, eff. 7/1/2017; Am. L.L. 2017/185, 10/8/2017,
eff. 12/7/2017; Am. L.L. 2017/186, 10/8/2017, eff. 12/7/2017; Am. L.L.
2019/038, 2/24/2019)



Section 19. Office to end domestic and gender-based.



   a.   The city of New York recognizes that domestic violence is a
public health issue that threatens hundreds of thousands of households each
year and that respects no boundaries of race, ethnicity, age, gender, sexual
orientation or economic status. The city of New York further recognizes that
the problems posed by domestic violence fall within the jurisdiction and
programs of various City agencies and that the development of an integrated
approach to the problem of domestic violence, which coordinates existing
services and systems, is critical to the success of the city of New York's
efforts in this area.



   b.   There shall be, in the executive office of the mayor, an office
to end domestic and gender-based violence. The office shall be headed by a
director, who shall be appointed by the mayor.



   c.   The director of the office to end domestic and gender-based
violence shall have the power and duty to:



      1.   coordinate domestic violence services;



      2.   formulate policies and programs relating to all aspects
of services and protocols for victims of domestic violence;



      3.   develop methods to improve the coordination of systems
and services for domestic violence;



      4.   develop and maintain mechanisms to improve the response
of city agencies to domestic violence situations and improve coordination
among such agencies; and



      5.   implement public education campaigns to heighten
awareness of domestic violence and its effects on society and perform such
other functions as may be appropriate regarding the problems posed by
domestic violence.



   d.   1.   For purposes of this subdivision, the following terms
shall have the following meanings:



         (i)   "Agency" shall mean a city, county, borough, or
other office, position, administration, department, division, bureau, board
or commission, or a corporation, institution or agency of government, the
expenses of which are paid in whole or in part from the city treasury.



         (ii)   "Domestic violence fatality" shall mean a death
of a family or household member, resulting from an act or acts of violence
committed by another family or household member, not including acts of
self-defense.



         (iii)   "Family or household member" shall mean the
following individuals:



            (a)   persons related by consanguinity or affinity;



            (b)   persons legally married to one another;



            (c)   persons formerly married to one another
regardless of whether they still reside in the same household;



            (d)   persons who have a child in common
regardless of whether such persons have been married or have lived together
at any time;



            (e)   persons not legally married, but currently
living together in a family-type relationship; and



            (f)   persons not legally married, but who have
formerly lived together in a family-type relationship.



            Such term, as described in (e) and (f) of this
subparagraph, therefore includes "common law" marriages, same sex couples,
registered domestic partners, different generations of the same family,
siblings and in-laws.



         (iv)   "Perpetrator" shall mean a family or household
member who committed an act or acts of violence resulting in a domestic
violence fatality.



         (v)   "Victim" shall mean a family or household member
whose death constitutes a domestic violence fatality.



      2.   There shall be a domestic violence fatality review
committee to examine aggregate information relating to domestic violence
fatalities in the city of New York. Such committee shall develop
recommendations for the consideration of the director of the office to end
domestic and gender-based violence regarding the coordination and improvement
of services for victims of domestic violence provided by agencies and private
organizations that provide such services pursuant to a contract with an
agency. The committee shall be convened by the director of the office to end
domestic and gender-based violence, or his or her designee, and shall consist
of the director of the office to end domestic and gender-based violence, or
his or her designee, the commissioner of the police department, or his or her
designee, the commissioner of the department of health and mental hygiene, or
his or her designee, the commissioner of the department of social
services/human resources administration, or his or her designee, the
commissioner of the department of homeless services, or his or her designee
and the commissioner of the administration for children's services, or his or
her designee. The committee shall also consist of two representatives of
programs that provide social or legal services to victims of domestic
violence and two individuals with personal experience with domestic violence.
The director of the office to end domestic and gender-based violence, or his
or her designee, shall serve as chairperson of the committee. At the
discretion of the director of the office to end domestic and gender-based
violence, the committee may also include a representative of any of the
offices of the district attorney of any of the five boroughs and/or a
representative of the New York city housing authority. Each member of the
committee other than any member serving in an ex officio capacity shall be
appointed by the mayor.



         (i)   The service of each member other than a member
serving in an ex officio capacity shall be for a term of two years to
commence ninety days after the effective date of the local law that added
this subdivision. Any vacancy occurring other than by expiration of term
shall be filled by the mayor in the same manner as the original position was
filled. A person filling such a vacancy shall serve for the unexpired portion
of the term of the member succeeded. New terms shall begin on the next day
after the expiration date of the preceding term.



         (ii)   Members of the committee shall serve without
compensation.



         (iii)   No person shall be ineligible for membership on
the committee because such person holds any other public office, employment
or trust, nor shall any person be made ineligible to or forfeit such person's
right to any public office, employment or trust by reason of such appointment.



         (iv)   The committee shall meet at least four times a
year.



      3.   The committee's work shall include, but not be limited
to, reviewing statistical data relating to domestic violence fatalities;
analyzing aggregate information relating to domestic violence fatalities,
including, non-identifying data with respect to victims and perpetrators
involved in domestic violence fatalities, such as gender, age, race and
familial or other relationship involved, and, if available, religion,
ethnicity and employment status; examining any factors indicating a high-risk
of involvement in domestic violence fatalities; and developing
recommendations for the director of the mayor's office to end domestic and
gender-based violence regarding the coordination and improvement of services
for victims of domestic violence provided by agencies and private
organizations that provide such services pursuant to a contract with an
agency.



      4.   The committee may request and receive information from
any agency as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this
subdivision, in accordance with applicable laws, rules and regulations,
including, but not limited to, the exceptions to disclosure of agency records
contained in the public officers law. Nothing in this subdivision shall be
construed as limiting any right or obligation of agencies pursuant to the
public officers law, including the exceptions to disclosure of agency records
contained in such law, with respect to access to or disclosure of records or
portions thereof. The committee may also request from any private
organization providing services to domestic violence victims pursuant to a
contract with an agency information necessary to carry out the provisions of
this subdivision. To the extent provided by law, the committee shall protect
the privacy of all individuals involved in any domestic violence fatality
that the committee may receive information on in carrying out the provisions
of this subdivision.



      5.   The committee shall submit to the mayor and to the
speaker of the city council, on an annual basis, a report including, but not
limited to, the number of domestic violence fatality cases which occurred in
the city of New York during the previous year; the number of domestic
violence fatality cases reviewed by the committee during the previous year,
if any; any non-identifying data with respect to victims and perpetrators
involved in domestic violence fatalities, such as gender, age, race and
familial or other relationship involved, and, if available, religion,
ethnicity and employment status; any factors indicating a high risk of
involvement in domestic violence fatalities; and recommendations regarding
the coordination and improvement of services for victims of domestic violence
provided by agencies and private organizations that provide such services
pursuant to a contract with an agency.



(Am. L.L. 2019/038, 2/24/2019)



Section 20. Office of long-term planning and sustainability.



   a.   The mayor shall establish an office of long-term planning and
sustainability. Such office may, but need not, be established in the
executive office of the mayor and may be established as a separate office or
within any other office of the mayor or within any department the head of
which is appointed by the mayor. Such office shall be headed by a director
who shall be appointed by the mayor or by the head of such department. For
the purposes of this section only, "director" shall mean the director of
long-term planning and sustainability.



   b.   Powers and duties. The director shall have the power and the
duty to:



      1.   develop and coordinate the implementation of policies,
programs and actions to meet the long-term needs of the city, with respect to
its infrastructure, environment and overall sustainability citywide,
including but not limited to the categories of housing, open space,
brownfields, transportation, water quality and infrastructure, air quality,
energy, and climate change; the resiliency of critical infrastructure, the
built environment, coastal protection and communities; and regarding city
agencies, businesses, institutions and the public;



      2.   develop measurable sustainability indicators, which shall
be used to assess the city's progress in achieving sustainability citywide;



      3.   take actions to increase public awareness and education
regarding sustainability and sustainable practices; and



      4.   appoint a deputy director who shall be responsible for
matters relating to resiliency of critical infrastructure, the built
environment, coastal protection and communities and who shall report to the
director.



   c.   Sustainability indicators. No later than December thirty-first,
two thousand eight and annually thereafter, the director shall identify a set
of indicators to assess and track the overall sustainability of the city with
respect to the categories established pursuant to paragraph one of
subdivision b of this section and any additional categories established by
the director, and prepare and make public a report on the city's performance
with respect to those indicators. Such report may be prepared and presented
in conjunction with the mayor's management report required pursuant to
section twelve of this chapter. The report shall include, at a minimum:



      1.   the city's progress in achieving sustainability citywide,
which shall be based in part on the sustainability indicators developed
pursuant to paragraph two of subdivision b of this section; and



      2.   any new or revised indicators that the director has
identified and used or will identify and use to assess the city's progress in
achieving sustainability citywide, including, where an indicator has been or
will be revised or deleted, the reason for such revision or deletion.



   d.   Population projections. No later than April twenty-second, two
thousand ten, and every four years thereafter, the department of city
planning shall release or approve and make public a population projection for
the city that covers a period of at least twenty-one years, with intermediate
projections at no less than ten year intervals. Where feasible, such
projections shall include geographic and demographic indicators.



   e.   Long-term sustainability plan.



      1.   The director shall develop and coordinate the
implementation of a comprehensive, long-term sustainability plan for the
city. Such plan shall include, at a minimum:



         i.   an identification and analysis of long-term
planning and sustainability issues associated with, but not limited to,
housing, open space, brownfields, transportation, water quality and
infrastructure, air quality, energy, and climate change; and



         ii.   goals associated with each category established
pursuant to paragraph one of subdivision b of this section and any additional
categories established by the director, and a list of policies, programs and
actions that the city will seek to implement or undertake to achieve each
goal by no later than April twenty-second, two thousand thirty.



      2.   No later than April twenty-second, two thousand eleven,
and no later than every four years thereafter, the director shall develop and
submit to the mayor and the speaker of the city council an updated long-term
sustainability plan, setting forth goals associated with each category
established pursuant to paragraph one of subdivision b of this section and
any additional categories established by the director, and a list of
policies, programs and actions that the city will seek to implement or
undertake to achieve each goal by no later than twenty years from the date
each such updated long-term sustainability plan is submitted. No later than
two thousand fifteen, and no later than every four years thereafter, the plan
shall also include a list of policies, programs and actions that the city
will seek to implement or undertake to achieve each goal relating to the
resiliency of critical infrastructure, the built environment, coastal
protection and communities. Such updated plan shall take into account the
population projections required pursuant to subdivision d of this section. An
updated plan shall include, for each four-year period beginning on the date
an updated plan is submitted to the mayor and the speaker of the city
council, implementation milestones for each policy, program and action
contained in such plan. An updated plan shall report on the status of the
milestones contained in the immediately preceding updated plan. Where any
categories, goals, policies, programs or actions have been revised in, added
to or deleted from an updated plan, or where any milestone has been revised
in or deleted from an updated plan, the plan shall include the reason for
such addition, revision or deletion. The director shall seek public input
regarding an updated plan and its implementation before developing and
submitting such plan pursuant to this paragraph. The director shall
coordinate the implementation of an updated long-term sustainability plan.



   f.   Review and reporting.



      1.   No later than April twenty-second, two thousand nine, and
no later than every April twenty-second thereafter, the director shall
prepare and submit to the mayor and the speaker of the city council a report
on the city's long-term planning and sustainability efforts. In those years
when an updated long-term sustainability plan is submitted pursuant to
paragraph two of subdivision e of this section, such report may be
incorporated into the updated long-term sustainability plan. The report shall
include, at a minimum:



         i.   the city's progress made to implement or undertake
policies, programs and actions included in the sustainability plan or updated
sustainability plan required by subdivision e of this section, since the
submission of the most recent plan or updated plan or report required by this
paragraph; and



         ii.   any revisions to policies, programs or actions in
the previous long-term sustainability plan, including the reason for such
revision.



   g.   There shall be a sustainability advisory board whose members,
including, at a minimum, representatives from environmental, environmental
justice, planning, architecture, engineering, coastal protection,
construction, critical infrastructure, labor, business and academic sectors,
shall be appointed by the mayor. The advisory board shall also include the
speaker of the city council or a designee and the chairperson of the council
committee on environmental protection or a designee. The advisory board shall
meet, at a minimum, twice per year and shall provide advice and
recommendations to the director regarding the provisions of this section.



   h.   The director shall post on the city's website, a copy of each
sustainability plan required by subdivision e of this section, and all
reports prepared pursuant to this section, within ten days of their
completion.



   i.   Interagency green team.



      1.   There is hereby established within the office an
interagency green team under the management of the director or the director's
designee to facilitate the use of innovative technologies, design and
construction techniques, materials or products that may have significant
environmental and sustainability benefits and to assist innovative projects
in addressing city agency regulatory requirements.



      2.   The interagency green team shall include as members the
commissioners of buildings, environmental protection, transportation, design
and construction, health and mental hygiene and the chairperson of the city
planning commission, or their respective designees, and such other members as
the director shall designate. The director shall also designate members from
among the fire commissioner and the commissioners of parks and recreation,
consumer affairs, emergency management, housing preservation and development,
sanitation, and the chairperson of the landmarks preservation commission, or
their respective designees, with respect to specific matters being considered
by the interagency green team where the director determines it appropriate to
do so.



   j.   The director or the director's designee, in consultation with
the commissioner of the department of health and mental hygiene, the
commissioner of the department of social services/human resources
administration, or their respective designees, and community based
organizations and service providers with relevant expertise and such other
individuals as the director shall designate, shall establish a set of
indicators to measure food security. Such indicators shall include but need
not be limited to an analysis of existing federal data on food security and
the use and impact of governmental nutrition assistance programs. The
director, or the director's designee, shall prepare and present a report on
such indicators to be included in the annual city food system metrics report
required pursuant to section 3-120 of the code.



Section 20-a. Office of labor standards.



   a.   The mayor shall establish an office of labor standards. Such
office may, but need not, be established in the executive office of the mayor
and may be established as a separate office or within any other office of the
mayor or within any department the head of which is appointed by the mayor.
Such office shall be headed by a director who shall be appointed by the mayor
or head of such department.



   b.   The director shall:



      (i)   plan, make recommendations, conduct research and develop
programs for worker education, worker safety and worker protection;



      (ii)   facilitate the exchange and dissemination of
information in consultation with city agencies, federal and state officials,
businesses, employees, independent contractors and nonprofit organizations
working in the field of worker education, safety, and protection;



      (iii)   provide educational materials to employers and develop
programs, including administrative support, to assist employers with
compliance with labor laws;



      (iv)   implement public education campaigns to heighten
awareness of employee and independent contractor rights under federal, state,
and local law;



      (v)   collect and analyze available federal, state, and local
data on the city's workforce and workplaces and coordinate with federal and
state officials and other city agencies to identify gaps and prioritize areas
for the improvement of working conditions and practices for employees and
independent contractors in the city and within particular industries, and to
promote the implementation and enforcement of laws, rules and regulations
designed to improve such working conditions and practices; and



      (vi)   recommend efforts to achieve workplace equity for
women, communities of color, immigrants and refugees, and other vulnerable
workers.



   c.   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the director shall
have all powers of the commissioner of consumer affairs as set forth in
section 2203 of this charter in connection with the enforcement of chapter 8
of title 20 of the administrative code of the city of New York regarding the
earned sick time act and shall have the power to enforce chapter 9 of title
20 of such code regarding mass transit benefits.



   d.   The director, in the performance of his or her functions,
powers and duties, including but not limited to those functions, powers and
duties pursuant to subdivision c of this section, shall be authorized to
receive complaints, conduct investigations in response to complaints or upon
his or her initiative, hold public and private hearings, administer oaths,
take testimony, serve subpoenas, receive evidence, mediate disputes, and to
receive, administer, pay over and distribute monies collected in and as a
result of actions brought for violations of any law the director is empowered
to enforce. The director shall have the power to promulgate rules necessary
to carry out such functions, powers, and duties.



   e.   1.   The director shall be authorized, upon due notice and
hearing, to render decisions and orders, including the imposition of civil
penalties, and to order equitable relief or the payment of monetary damages
for the violation of any rules, regulations or laws the director is empowered
to enforce pursuant to this section, the provisions of subchapter four of
chapter one of title three of the administrative code of the city of New York
or any other general, special or local law. The remedies or penalties
provided for in this subdivision shall be in addition to any other remedies
or penalties provided by law for the enforcement of such provisions.



      2.   All such actions or proceedings shall be commenced by the
service of a notice of violation. The director shall prescribe the form and
wording of such notices. The notice of violation or copy thereof when filled
in and served shall constitute notice of the violation charged, and if sworn
and affirmed, shall be prima facie evidence of the facts contained therein.



      3.   The office of administrative trials and hearings may
exercise all adjudicatory powers conferred upon the director by the charter,
the administrative code of the city of New York, or any other general,
special or local law consistent with chapter 45-A of the charter.



   f.   The director shall possess such powers in addition to any other
powers that may be assigned to him or her, pursuant to any other provision of
law, by the mayor or head of such department wherein the office has been
established.



   g.   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the mayor may
designate an agency or agencies other than the office of labor standards to
perform any of the functions of the director, as described in this section
and subchapter four of chapter one of title three of the administrative code
of the city of New York. Such agency or agencies may be within any other
office of the mayor or within any department the head of which is appointed
by the mayor. Upon such designation, such agency or agencies shall be deemed
to have the powers of the director as set forth in this section and
subchapter four of chapter one of title three of such administrative code
with respect to the function or functions so designated.



   h.   Division of paid care. The director of the office of labor
standards shall establish a division of paid care within the office of labor
standards and shall appoint the division head.



(L.L. 2015/104, 11/30/2015, eff. 3/29/2016; Am. L.L. 2016/098, 8/31/2016,
eff. 2/27/2017)



Section 20-b. Commission on gender equity.



   a.   There shall be a commission on gender equity to study the
nature and extent of inequities facing women and girls in the city; to study
their impact on the economic, civic, and social well-being of women and
girls; to advise on ways to analyze the function and composition of city
agencies through a gender-based lens and ways to develop equitable
recruitment strategies; and to make recommendations to the mayor and the
council for the reduction of gender-based inequality. Such commission shall
consist of 26 members appointed by the mayor; 5 members appointed by the
speaker of the council; and the chair of the commission on human rights, who
shall serve as an ex officio member. Members of the commission shall be
representative of the New York city population and shall have experience in
advocating for issues important to women and girls. The mayor shall designate
one member to serve as chair of the commission, and may also designate a
member to serve as co-chair. Members shall serve at the pleasure of the
appointing authority. In the event of the death or resignation of any member,
his or her successor shall be appointed by the official who appointed such
member. The mayor shall appoint an executive director for the commission.



   b.   The commission shall have the power and duty to:



      1.   hold at least one meeting every four months, including at
least one annual meeting open to the public;



      2.   keep a record of its activities;



      3.   determine its own rules of procedure; and



      4.   perform such advisory duties and functions as may be
necessary to achieve its purposes as described in subdivision a of this
section.



   c.   The commission may request information from any city agency or
office it deems necessary to enable the commission to properly carry out its
functions. The commission may also request from any private organization
providing services to women and girls in the city pursuant to a contract with
a city agency or office, information necessary to enable the commission to
properly carry out its functions.



   d.   No later than December 1, 2017 and annually by December 1
thereafter, the commission shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the
council a report concerning its activities during the previous twelve months,
the goals for the following year, and recommendations pursuant to subdivision
a of this section.



(L.L. 2016/067, 6/5/2016, eff. 9/3/2016)



Section 20-c. Drug strategy.



   a.   Such agency or office that the mayor shall designate shall
prepare short-term and long-term plans and recommendations to coordinate and
effectively utilize private and public resources to address problems
associated with illicit and non-medical drug use and to address the effects
associated with past and current drug policies in this city.



   b.   No later than February 1, 2018, and no later than February 1
biennially thereafter, the designated agency shall prepare and submit to the
mayor and the speaker of the city council a report on municipal drug
strategy. The department shall consult with relevant stakeholders, including
but not limited to community-based harm reduction programs, licensed
substance use disorder treatment programs, healthcare providers, prevention
programs, drug policy reform organizations, community-based criminal justice
programs, persons directly affected by drug use, persons formerly
incarcerated for drug related offenses, and experts in issues related to
illicit and non-medical drug use and policies, in preparing the report. Such
report shall include, but not be limited to:



      1.   A summary of current drug policies, programs, and
services in the city, including an overview of goals to address the use of
illicit and non-medical drugs such as the use of prescription drugs for
non-prescription purposes;



      2.   A summary of interventions needed in order to reduce
drug-related disease, mortality, and crime, and any inequities and
disparities related to race, ethnicity, age, income, gender, geography, and
immigration status;



      3.   An overview of programs, legislation or administrative
action to promote and support health and wellness related to drug use, as
well as to improve the public health and safety of the city’s individuals,
families, and communities by addressing the health, social and economic
problems associated with illicit and non-medical drug use, past or current
drug policies, and to reduce any stigma associated with drug use;



      4.   An overview of the city’s efforts to collaborate with
existing substance use, medical, and mental health services, including
community-based harm reduction programs, licensed substance use disorder
treatment programs, healthcare providers, formalized recovery support
programs, youth prevention programs, drug policy reform programs and
community-based criminal justice programs to develop and foster effective
responses to illicit and non-medical drug use in the city;



      5.   An overview of pilot programs related to illicit and
non-medical drug use;



      6.   An overview of any other proposals to achieve the
city-wide goals and objectives related to illicit and non-medical drug use,
including, if available, timelines for implementation; and



      7.   Data on the projected number of opioid antagonists needed
by all relevant city agencies, the actual number of opioid antagonists
distributed to all relevant city agencies and the number of opioid
antagonists distributed to registered opioid overdose prevention programs
citywide.



   c.   There shall be a municipal drug strategy advisory council whose
members shall include, but not be limited to, the head of the designated
agency, or their representative, who shall be chair, a representative from
the department of health and mental hygiene, the department of education, the
health and hospitals corporation, the police department, the administration
for children’s services, the human resources administration, the department
of corrections, the department of probation, and the department of homeless
services, the speaker of the city council and up to three members appointed
by the speaker, and representatives of any other agencies that the head of
the designated agency may designate, as well as at least eight
representatives, including but not limited to at least one from each of the
following: continuum of care providers, those directly affected by drug use,
those in recovery from drug use, people formerly incarcerated for drug
related offenses, and experts in issues related to illicit and non-medical
drug use and policies. The head of the designated agency or their
representative may establish subcommittees comprised of governmental or
nongovernmental representatives as deemed necessary to accomplish the work of
the municipal drug strategy advisory council. The municipal drug strategy
advisory council shall:



      1.   Make recommendations to the head of the designated agency
regarding the development of the municipal drug strategy report required
pursuant to this section;



      2.   Produce an advisory addendum, as deemed necessary by the
municipal drug strategy advisory council, to the New York municipal city drug
policy strategy report, as prepared by the head of the designated agency,
pursuant to subdivision c of this section;



      3.   Advise on relevant federal, state, and local legislation,
programs, and other governmental activities;



      4.   Make recommendations to the head of the designated agency
regarding the implementation of city-wide goals and objectives related to the
risks associated with illicit and non-medical drug use; and



      5.   Hold at least four meetings each fiscal year, at least
one of which shall be open to the general public for input and comments.



(L.L. 2017/048, 3/21/2017; Am. L.L. 2018/129, 6/26/2018)



Editor's note: L.L. 2017/048, 3/21/2017, § 2 provides: "This local law takes
effect immediately and shall expire and be deemed repealed following the
submission of the required report pursuant to this local law due in February
2022."



Section 20-d. Office of nightlife.



   a.   Definitions. For the purposes of this section the following
terms have the following meanings:



      Director. The term “director” means the director of the
office of nightlife.



      Nightlife establishment. The term “nightlife establishment”
means an establishment that is open to the public for entertainment or
leisure, serves alcohol or where alcohol is consumed on the premises, and
conducts a large volume of business at night. Such term includes, but is not
limited to, bars, entertainment venues, clubs and restaurants.



      Office. The term “office” means the office of nightlife.



   b.   The mayor shall establish an office of nightlife. Such office
may be established within any office of the mayor or as a separate office or
within any agency that does not conduct enforcement against nightlife
establishments. Such office shall be headed by a director who shall be
appointed by the mayor or by the head of such office or agency.



   c.   Powers and duties. The director shall have the power and duty
to:



      1.   Serve as a liaison to nightlife establishments in
relation to city policies and procedures affecting the nightlife industry
and, in such capacity, shall:



         (a)   Conduct outreach to nightlife establishments and
provide information and assistance to such establishments in relation to
existing city policies and procedures for responding to complaints,
violations and other enforcement actions, and assist in the resolution of
conditions that lead to enforcement actions;



         (b)   Serve as a point of contact for nightlife
establishments and ensure adequate access to the office that is responsive to
the nature of the nightlife industry; and



         (c)   Work with other city agencies to refer such
establishments to city services that exist to help them in seeking to obtain
relevant licenses, permits or approvals from city agencies;



      2.   Advise and assist the mayor and the heads of city
agencies that have powers and duties relating to nightlife establishments
including, but not limited to, the department of consumer affairs, the police
department, the fire department, the department of health and mental hygiene,
the department of city planning, the department of buildings and the
department of small business services, on issues relating to the nightlife
industry;



      3.   Review information obtained from 311 or other city
agencies on complaints regarding and violations issued to nightlife
establishments and develop recommendations to address recurring problems or
trends, in consultation with industry representatives, advocates, city
agencies, community boards and residents;



      4.   Serve as the intermediary between city agencies,
including law enforcement agencies, residents and the nightlife industry to
pursue, through policy recommendations, long-term solutions to issues related
to the nightlife industry;



      5.   Review and convey to the office of labor standards
information relating to nightlife industry workforce conditions and upon
request, assist such office in developing recommendations to address common
issues or trends related to such conditions;



      6.   Promote an economically and culturally vibrant nightlife
industry, while accounting for the best interests of the city and its
residents; and



      7.   Perform other relevant duties as the mayor may assign.



   d.   Notwithstanding subdivision c of this section, paragraph 1 of
such subdivision shall not apply to any cultural organization that is
identified by the department of cultural affairs as eligible to receive grant
funding from such department, except as otherwise determined by the director
and such department.



   e.   Report. Within 18 months of the effective date of the local law
that added this section, and annually thereafter, the director shall prepare
and submit a report to the mayor and the speaker of the council that shall
include, but not be limited to, the activities of the office and any
recommendations developed by the director pursuant to this section.



   f.   Nightlife advisory board.



      1.   There shall be a nightlife advisory board to advise the
mayor and the council on issues relating to nightlife establishments. The
advisory board shall identify and study common issues and trends relating to
the nightlife industry and shall make recommendations, as appropriate, to the
mayor and the council on ways to improve laws and policies that impact
nightlife establishments. The nightlife advisory board shall examine the
following: (i) the regulatory structure of the nightlife industry; (ii)
common complaints regarding nightlife establishments; (iii) public safety
concerns related to the nightlife industry; (iv) the enforcement of nightlife
industry-related laws and rules; (v) zoning and other community development
concerns related to the nightlife industry; (vi) integration of the nightlife
industry into the city's various neighborhoods; (vii) nightlife workforce
conditions, including but not limited to, wages and workforce safety; (viii)
the availability and responsiveness of the office of nightlife to the
concerns of nightlife establishments; and (ix) any other issues the nightlife
advisory board finds are relevant.



      2.   The nightlife advisory board shall consist of 14 members,
of whom nine members shall be appointed by the speaker of the council and
five by the mayor. Such board shall provide reasonable notice of its meetings
to the director, who may attend such meetings and may coordinate the
attendance of relevant agency heads or their designees.



      3.   All members shall serve for a term of two years and may
be removed by the appointing official for cause. Upon appointment of all the
members, the nightlife advisory board shall elect a chair from its membership
by a majority vote of such advisory board. Any vacancy on the nightlife
advisory board shall be filled in the same manner as an original appointment.



      4.   The nightlife advisory board shall keep a record of its
deliberations and determine its own rules of procedure, which shall include a
procedure or mechanism by which members of the public may make submissions to
the board. The first meeting of the nightlife advisory board shall be
convened within 120 days after the effective date of the local law that added
this section.



      5.   Within 18 months of the effective date of the local law
that added this section, the nightlife advisory board shall submit
recommendations to the mayor and the council. After such date, the nightlife
advisory board may submit recommendations to the mayor and the council as
appropriate.



   g.   Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the powers
of any other agency pursuant to any other law or to limit, bind or affect the
decision of any agency or officer pursuant to any process required pursuant
to the charter or any other law.



(L.L. 2017/178, 9/19/2017, eff. 11/18/2017; Am. L.L. 2018/103, 5/12/2018)



Section 20-e. Committee on city healthcare services.



   a.   There shall be a committee on city healthcare services
established by the mayor, or the mayor’s designee, to review
community-based health indicators in New York city, and evaluate
community-level health needs that can be addressed by city healthcare
services.



   b.   Such committee shall consist of, but need not be limited to: a
representative from the department of health and mental hygiene;
representatives from city agencies that provide healthcare services or that
contract with entities for the provision of healthcare services; the speaker
of the council or their designee; and the chairperson of the council
committee on health, or successor committee, or their designee. A
representative of the New York city health and hospitals corporation shall be
invited to join. In addition, the mayor and the speaker shall each appoint
five members representing healthcare stakeholders throughout the city.



   c.   The mayor or the mayor’s designee shall designate the
chairperson of the committee from among its members who shall preside over
meetings. Members will be eligible for reappointment every four years.



   d.   The committee shall issue a report on October 15, 2018, and
every two years thereafter. Such report shall be submitted to the mayor and
the speaker of the council and posted online. The report shall include, but
not be limited to, the following information and data:



      1.   A review and compendium of reports produced by the city
over the previous two-year period pertaining to the provision of healthcare
services.



      2.   Recommendations for utilizing city healthcare services to
address the healthcare needs of, and engage in outreach to, vulnerable
populations, including, but not limited to: low-income individuals; the
uninsured; the under-insured; homeless individuals and families; incarcerated
individuals; communities of color; the aging; lesbian, gay, bisexual and
transgender individuals; immigrants; women; people with limited English
proficiency; individuals under the age of 21; and people with disabilities;



      3.   A summary of any projects or programs undertaken to
coordinate healthcare services across city agencies, with particular emphasis
on historically underserved or vulnerable populations, and recommendations to
improve such coordination and make optimal use of existing healthcare
services;



      4.   A description for the immediately preceding fiscal year
of allocations for healthcare services by the department of health and mental
hygiene and all other agencies directly providing healthcare services to
anyone other than an employee of such agency, or which contract with entities
for the direct provision of healthcare services, and the number of persons
served by the department and such agencies. The information described in this
subparagraph shall be provided to the mayor and the speaker annually on
October 15; and



      5.   A review and analysis of existing reportable city agency
data for the immediately preceding fiscal year that may include, but need not
be limited to, the following data, disaggregated geographically to the extent
the data is available in such a disaggregated format:



         (a)   insurance coverage,



         (b)   infant mortality rates per 1000 live births,



         (c)   immunizations,



         (d)   smoking,



         (e)   obesity,



         (f)   hypertension,



         (g)   asthma,



         (h)   preventive care visits,



         (i)   emergency room visits,



         (j)   number of unique inpatients and outpatient visits
at facilities operated by health and hospitals corporation, and



         (k)   other data or indicators of community health and
healthcare service delivery.



      6.   An overview of the locations of clinical healthcare
services operated by the city, inclusive of current street addresses.



   e.   In carrying out the requirements of this section, the committee
shall provide opportunity for meaningful and relevant input from, and duly
solicit and consider the recommendations of, additional local providers of
healthcare services, healthcare workers and organizations representing them,
social service providers, community groups, patient and community advocacy
organizations, and other members of the public.



(L.L. 2018/006, 12/31/2017, eff. 4/30/2018)



Section 20-f. Office of data analytics.



   a.   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the term
“director” means the director of the office of data analytics.



   b.   The mayor shall establish an office of data analytics. Such
office may be established in the executive office of the mayor and may be
established as a separate office or within any other office of the mayor or
within any department the head of which is appointed by the mayor. Such
office shall be headed by a director who shall be appointed by the mayor or
head of such department and who shall serve as the city’s chief analytics
officer and chief open platform officer, as defined in the open data policy
and technical standards manual.



   c.   The director shall have the power and duty to:



      1.   Collaborate with agencies to: (i) analyze data, promote
data-driven policy making, decision making, conduct research and analysis to
best fulfill agencies’ respective missions, and support agencies in
developing strategies to conduct their own analytics based on such data; and
(ii) convene directors of analytics or their equivalents from agencies to
encourage and implement citywide analytics strategies;



      2.   Collaborate with the department of information technology
and telecommunications, mayor’s office of operations, the mayor’s office
for economic opportunity, the mayor’s office of information privacy, and
other relevant offices in order to: (i) facilitate data sharing between city
agencies and citywide analytics of publicly and non-publicly available data
by contributing to technology system requirements and protocols, using open
standards whenever practicable; (ii) advise on data strategy for data
integration use cases;



      3.   Advise agencies on data analytics and data integration
strategy best practices when sharing data, procuring new data systems, and
hiring or training analytics staff;



      4.   Maintain an open analytics library that shall allow the
office of data analytics to share the source code for data analytics projects
to increase awareness of the way city agencies use data and develop
analytical tools. Such library shall be maintained on the office’s website
and made available to the public;



      5.   Serve as the designated point of contact for outside
partners contributing to or using public data sets;



      6.   Work with department of information technology and
telecommunications, and other agencies as appropriate, to implement the
city’s open data law, assist agency open data coordinators in ensuring
compliance by their agencies with requirements regarding accessibility to
public data sets, and take action to make data more accessible to and
actionable by the public, in accordance with applicable law; and



      7.   Guide the training of agency staff, community boards and
members of the public on the use of the web portal required by section 23-502
of the administrative code, and develop and implement an open data public
education strategy.



   d.   The director shall possess such powers, in addition to any
powers vested in him or her pursuant to any other provision of law that may
be assigned by the mayor or head of such department wherein the office has
been established.



(L.L. 2018/222, 12/15/2018)



§ 20-g. Office for the prevention of hate crimes.



   a.   The mayor shall establish an office for the prevention of hate
crimes. Such office may be established within any office of the mayor or as a
separate office or within any other office of the mayor or within any
department the head of which is appointed by the mayor. Such office shall be
headed by a coordinator who shall be appointed by the mayor or the head of
such department. For the purposes of this section only, “coordinator”
shall mean the coordinator of the office for the prevention of hate crimes.



   b.   Powers and duties. The coordinator shall have the power and the
duty to:



      1.   Advise and assist the mayor in planning and implementing
for coordination and cooperation among agencies under the jurisdiction of the
mayor that are involved in prevention, awareness, investigation and
prosecution, and impact on communities of hate crimes.



      2.   Create and implement a coordinated system for the
city’s response to hate crimes. Such system shall, in conjunction with the
New York city commission on human rights’ bias response teams, the police
department, and any relevant agency or office, coordinate responses to hate
crime allegations.



      3.   Review the budget requests of all agencies for programs
related to hate crimes, and recommend to the mayor budget priorities among
such.



      4.   Prepare and submit to the mayor and the council and post
on the city’s website by January 30 of each year an annual report of the
activities of the office, regarding the prevalence of hate crimes during the
previous calendar year and the availability of services to address the impact
of these crimes. Such report shall include but need not be limited to the
following information: (i) identification of areas or populations within the
city that are particularly vulnerable to hate crimes, (ii) identification and
assessment of the efficacy of counseling and resources for victims of hate
crimes, making recommendations for improvements of the same, (iii) collation
of city, state and federal statistics on hate crime complaints and
prosecutions within the city, including incidents by offense, bias
motivation, and demographic characteristics such as age and gender of
offenders, (iv) the populations to which the division of educational outreach
addressed, (v) the types of programs created or provided by the division of
educational outreach and the names of the providers of such programs, and
(vi) any other outreach, education, and prevention efforts made by the
division of educational outreach.



      5.   Study the effectiveness of, and make recommendations with
respect to, the expansion of safety plans for neighborhoods and institutions
that are particularly vulnerable to hate crimes, and the resources available
for victims. This paragraph shall not require the disclosure of material that
would reveal non-routine investigative techniques or confidential information
or where disclosure could compromise the safety of the public or police
officers or could otherwise compromise law enforcement investigations or
operations.



      6.   Serve as liaison for the city with providers of victim
services, community groups, and other relevant nongovernmental entities and
assist in the coordination among such entities on reporting and responding to
allegations of hate crimes, to ensure that city residents have access to
relevant services after hate crime events.



      7.   Perform other duties as the mayor may assign.



   c.   The coordinator shall establish a division of educational
outreach. The division shall have the power and the duty to:



      1.   Ensure, by such means as necessary, including
coordination with relevant city agencies and interfaith organizations,
community groups, and human rights and civil rights groups, the provision of
effective outreach and education on the impact and effects of hate crimes,
including measures necessary to achieve greater tolerance and understanding,
and including the use of law enforcement where appropriate.



      2.   Create a K-12 curriculum addressing issues related to
hate crimes, in consultation with the department of education.



      3.   Perform other duties as the mayor may assign.



(L.L. 2019/046, 2/24/2019, eff. 11/24/2019; Am. L.L. 2019/047, 2/24/2019,
eff. 11/24/2019)



Chapter 2: Council



Section 21. The Council.



   There shall be a council which shall be the legislative body of the
city. In addition to the other powers vested in it by this charter and other
law, the council shall be vested with the legislative power of the city. Any
enumeration of powers in this charter shall not be held to limit the
legislative power of the council, except as specifically provided in this
charter.



Section 22. Composition of council.



   a.   The council shall consist of the public advocate and of
fifty-one other members termed council members. Consistent with state law,
the size of the council and the number of districts from which council
members are elected may be increased by local law without approval pursuant
to section thirty-eight.



   b.   One council member shall be elected from each council district
as now or hereafter constituted.



Section 23. Council members not to be employees of agencies.



   No council member shall be an employee of any agency in any capacity
whatever.



Section 24. Public advocate.



   a.   The public advocate shall be elected by the electors of the
city at the same time and for the same term as in this charter prescribed for
the mayor. A public advocate who resigns or is removed from office prior to
the completion of a full term shall be deemed to have held that office for a
full term for purposes of Section 1138 of the charter.



   b.   The public advocate may be removed or suspended in the same
manner as provided in this charter with respect to the mayor.



   c.   Any vacancy in the office of public advocate shall be filled by
popular election in the following manner:



      1.   Within three days of the occurrence of a vacancy in the
office of the public advocate, the mayor shall proclaim the date for the
election or elections required by this subdivision, provide notice of such
proclamation to the city clerk and the board of elections and publish notice
thereof in the City Record. After the proclamation of the date for an
election to be held pursuant to paragraphs four or five of this subdivision,
the city clerk shall publish notice thereof not less than twice in each week
preceding the date of such election in newspapers distributed within the
city, and the board of elections shall mail notice of such election to all
registered voters within the city.



      2.   If a vacancy occurs during the first three years of the
term, a general election to fill the vacancy for the remainder of the
unexpired term shall be held in the year in which the vacancy occurs, unless
the vacancy occurs after the last day on which an occurring vacancy may be
filled at the general election in that same year with party nominations of
candidates for such election being made at a primary election, as provided in
section 6-116 of the election law. If such a vacancy occurs in any year after
such last day, it shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term at
the general election in the following year provided, however, that no general
election to fill a vacancy shall be held in the last year of the term, except
as provided in paragraph nine of this subdivision. Party nominations of
candidates for a general election to fill a vacancy for the remainder of the
unexpired term shall be made at a primary election, except as provided in
paragraph five of this subdivision.



      3.   If a special or general election to fill the vacancy on
an interim basis has not been previously held pursuant to paragraphs four,
six, seven and eight of this subdivision, the person elected to fill the
vacancy for the remainder of the unexpired term at a general election shall
take office immediately upon qualification and shall serve until the term
expires. If a special or general election to fill the vacancy on an interim
basis has been previously held, the person elected to fill the vacancy for
the remainder of the unexpired term at a general election shall take office
on January first of the year following such general election and shall serve
until the term expires.



      4.   If a vacancy occurs during the first three years of the
term and on or before the last day in the third year of the term on which an
occurring vacancy may be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term at a
general election with party nominations of candidates for such election being
made at a primary election, as provided in section 6-116 of the election law,
a special or general election to fill the vacancy on an interim basis shall
be held, unless the vacancy occurs less than ninety days before the next
primary election at which party nominations for a general election to fill
the vacancy may be made and on or before the last day on which an occurring
vacancy may be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term at the general
election in the same year in which the vacancy occurs with party nominations
of candidates for such election being made at a primary election, as provided
in section 6-116 of the election law.



      5.   If a vacancy occurs after the last day in the third year
of the term on which an occurring vacancy may be filled for the remainder of
the unexpired term at a general election in such year with party nominations
of candidates for such election being made at a primary election, as provided
in section 6-116 of the election law, but not less than ninety days before
the date of the primary election in the fourth year of such term, a special
or general election to fill such vacancy for the remainder of the unexpired
term shall be held.



      6.   Elections held pursuant to paragraph four or five of this
subdivision shall be scheduled in the following manner: A special election to
fill the vacancy shall be held on the first Tuesday at least forty-five days
after the occurrence of the vacancy, provided that the mayor, in the
proclamation required by paragraph one of this subdivision, may schedule such
election for another day no more than ten days after such Tuesday and not
less than forty days after such proclamation if the mayor determines that
such rescheduling is necessary to facilitate maximum voter participation;
except that



         (a)   if the vacancy occurs before September twentieth
in any year and the first Tuesday at least forty-five days after the
occurrence of the vacancy is less than ninety days before a regularly
scheduled general election or between a primary and a general election, the
vacancy shall be filled at such general election;



         (b)   if the vacancy occurs before September twentieth
in any year and the first Tuesday at least forty-five days after the
occurrence of the vacancy is after a regularly scheduled general election,
the vacancy shall be filled at such general election; and



         (c)   if the vacancy occurs on or after September
twentieth in any year and the first Tuesday at least forty-five days after
the occurrence of the vacancy is after, but less than thirty days after, a
regularly scheduled general election, the vacancy shall be filled at a
special election to be held on the first Tuesday in December in such year.



      7.   All nominations for elections to fill vacancies held
pursuant to paragraphs four and five of this subdivision shall be by
independent nominating petition. A signature on an independent nominating
petition made earlier than the date of the proclamation required by paragraph
one of this subdivision shall not be counted.



      8.   A person elected to fill a vacancy in the office of
public advocate at an election held pursuant to paragraph four of this
subdivision shall take office immediately upon qualification and serve until
December thirty-first of the year in which the vacancy is filled for the
remainder of the unexpired term pursuant to paragraph two of this
subdivision. A person elected to fill a vacancy in the office of public
advocate at an election held pursuant to paragraph five of this subdivision
shall take office immediately upon qualification and serve until the term
expires.



      9.   If a vacancy occurs less than ninety days before the date
of the primary election in the last year of the term, the person elected at
the general election in such year for the next succeeding term shall take
office immediately upon qualification and fill the vacancy for the remainder
of the unexpired term.



   d.   The public advocate may, by written authority filed with the
appropriate board, body or committee and with the city clerk, designate any
two officers or employees appointed by the public advocate to exercise the
powers specified in this subdivision. Either such officer or employee, so
designated, may act in the place of the public advocate on any board, body or
committee, other than the council, of which the public advocate is a member
whenever the public advocate shall be absent from a meeting of said board,
body or committee for any reason whatever.



   e.   The public advocate shall have the right to participate in the
discussion of the council but shall not have a vote.



   f.   In addition to other duties and responsibilities, the public
advocate shall serve as the public advocate and shall (1) monitor the
operation of the public information and service complaint programs of city
agencies and make proposals to improve such programs; (2) review complaints
of a recurring and multiborough or city-wide nature relating to services and
programs, and make proposals to improve the city's response to such
complaints; (3) receive individual complaints concerning city services and
other administrative actions of city agencies; and (4) investigate and
otherwise attempt to resolve such individual complaints except for those
which (i) another city agency is required by law to adjudicate, (ii) may be
resolved through a grievance mechanism established by collective bargaining
agreement or contract, or (iii) involve allegations of conduct which may
constitute a violation of criminal law or a conflict of interest. If the
public advocate receives a complaint which is subject to a procedure
described in items (i) or (ii) of this paragraph, the public advocate shall
advise the complainant of the appropriate procedure for the resolution of
such complaint. If the public advocate receives a complaint of the type
described in item (iii) of this paragraph, the public advocate shall promptly
refer the matter in accordance with subdivision k of this section.



   g.   The public advocate shall establish procedures for receiving
and processing complaints, responding to complainants, conducting
investigations, and reporting findings, and shall inform the public about
such procedures. Upon an initial determination that a complaint may be valid,
the public advocate shall refer it to the appropriate agency. If such agency
does not resolve the complaint within a reasonable time, the public advocate
may conduct an investigation and make specific recommendations to the agency
for resolution of the complaint. If, within a reasonable time after the
public advocate has completed an investigation and submitted recommendations
to an agency, such agency has failed to respond in a satisfactory manner to
the recommendations, the public advocate may issue a report to the council
and the mayor. Such report shall describe the conclusions of the
investigation and make such recommendations for administrative, legislative,
or budgetary action, together with their fiscal implications, as the public
advocate deems necessary to resolve the individual complaint or complaints or
to address the underlying problems discovered in the investigation.



   h.   In addition to other duties and responsibilities, the public
advocate may review the programs of city agencies. Such reviews shall
include, but not be limited to, annual evaluations of: (1) the implementation
of the requirements for coterminality of local services contained in all
subdivisions of section twenty seven hundred four; (2) the effectiveness of
the public information and service complaint programs of city agencies; and
(3) the responsiveness of city agencies to individual and group requests for
data or information regarding the agencies' structure, activities and
operations. The public advocate shall submit any reports documenting or
summarizing such reviews to the council, mayor and appropriate agency and
shall include in such reports his or her recommendations for addressing the
problems identified and the fiscal implications of such recom- mendations.



   i.   Except for those matters which involve conduct which may
constitute a violation of criminal law or a conflict of interest, the public
advocate may, on the request of a resident, taxpayer, community board,
council member or borough president, or on his or her own motion, inquire
into any alleged failure of a city officer or agency to comply with any
provision of the charter. If as a result of such inquiry, the public advocate
concludes that there is any substantial failure to comply with any provision
of the charter, he or she shall submit a preliminary report documenting the
conclusions of the inquiry to the officer or officers and the head of each
agency involved. Within a resonable time after submitting such preliminary
report, the public advocate shall issue a final report to the council, mayor,
and agency documenting the conclusions of the inquiry.



   j.   The public advocate shall have timely access to those records
and documents of city agencies which the public advocate deems necessary to
complete the investigations, inquiries and reviews required by this section.
If a city agency does not comply with the public advocate's request for such
records and documents, the public advocate may request an appropriate
committee of the council to require the production of such records and
documents pursuant to section twenty-nine of the charter. The provisions of
this subdivision shall not apply to those records and documents of city
agencies for which a claim of privilege may properly be raised or which are
prepared or maintained by the department of investigation for use in any
investigation authorized by chapter thirty-four of the charter.



   k.   If the public advocate receives a complaint alleging conduct
which may constitute a violation of criminal law or a conflict of interest,
he or she shall promptly refer the complaint regarding criminal conduct to
the department of investigation or, as applicable, to the appropriate
prosecuting attorney or other law enforcement agency and shall refer the
complaint regarding conflict of interest to the conflicts of interest board.
If during the conduct of any investigation, inquiry, or review authorized by
this section, the public advocate discovers that the matter involves conduct
which may constitute a violation of criminal law or a conflict of interest,
he or she shall take no further action but shall promptly refer the matter
regarding criminal conduct to the department of investigation or, as
applicable, to the appropriate prosecuting attorney or other law enforcement
agency and shall promptly refer the matter regarding conflict of interest to
the conflicts of interest board. Unless otherwise provided by law, all
complaints received and any investigative file prepared or maintained by the
public advocate regarding matters covered by this subdivision, shall be
confidential.



   l.   Before making public any portion of any draft, preliminary or
final report relating to the operations or activities of a city officer or
agency, the public advocate shall send a copy of the draft report to any such
officer, and to the head of any agency, discussed in such report and provide
the officer and agency, in writing, with a reasonable deadline for their
review and response. The public advocate shall include in any report, or
portion thereof, which is made public a copy of all such officer and agency
responses.



   m.   The public advocate may hold public hearings in the course of
fulfilling the requirements of this section provided that a complete
transcript of any such hearings shall be made available for public inspection
free of charge within sixty days after the hearing. The public advocate shall
also provide a copy of any requested pages of such transcript at a reasonable
fee to cover copying and, if relevant, mailing costs.



   n.   Not later than the thirty-first day of October of each year,
the public advocate shall present to the council a report on the activities
of the office during the preceding fiscal year. The report shall include: (1)
a statistical summary of the complaints received during such fiscal year,
categorized by agency, type of complaint, agency response, mode of
resolution, and such other factors as the public advocate deems appropriate;
(2) an analysis of recurring complaints and the public advocate's
recommendations for administrative, legislative or budgetary actions to
resolve the underlying problems causing the complaints; (3) a summary of the
findings and recommendations of the agency program reviews conducted during
the fiscal year and a summary of the agency responses to such findings and
recommendations; (4) a summary of the charter requirements which, in the
opinion of the public advocate are not being implemented by the city agencies
and officers subject to them, including a description of the nature and
extent of the failure to comply and a summary of the responses of the
agencies or officers to the public advocate's conclusions; and (5) a summary
of improvements in charter compliance since the public advocate's last annual
report. The public advocate shall include an assessment of the fiscal
implications of any recommendations presented in this report.



Section 25. Election; term; vacancies.



   a.   The council members shall be elected at the general election in
the year nineteen hundred seventy-seven and every fourth year thereafter and
the term of office of each council member shall commence on the first day of
January after the elections and shall continue for four years thereafter;
provided, however, that the council member elected at the general election in
the year two thousand and one and at the general election in every twentieth
year thereafter shall serve for a term of two years commencing on the first
day of January after such election; and provided further that an additional
election of Council Members shall be held at the general election in the year
two thousand three and at the general election every twentieth year
thereafter and that the members elected at each such additional election
shall serve for a term of two years beginning on the first day of January
after such election.



   Notwithstanding any other provision of this charter or other law, a
full term of two years, as established by this subsection, shall not
constitute a full term under section 1138 of this charter, except that two
consecutive full terms of two years shall constitute one full term under
section 1138. A member of the council who resigns or is removed from office
prior to the completion of a full term shall be deemed to have held that
office for a full term for purposes of section 1138 of the charter.



   b.   Any vacancy which may occur among the council members shall be
filled by popular election in the following manner.



      1.   Within three days of the occurrence of a vacancy in the
council, the mayor shall proclaim the date for the election or elections
required by this subdivision, provide notice of such proclamation to the city
clerk and the board of elections and publish notice thereof in the City
Record. After the proclamation of the date for an election to be held
pursuant to paragraphs four or five of this subdivision, the city clerk shall
publish notice thereof not less than twice in each week preceding the date of
such election in newspapers distributed within the city, and the board of
elections shall mail notice of such election to all registered voters within
the district in which the election is to be held.



      2.   If a vacancy occurs during the first three years of a
four-year term or the first year of a two-year term, a general election to
fill the vacancy for the remainder of the unexpired term shall be held in the
year in which the vacancy occurs, unless the vacancy occurs after the last
day on which an occurring vacancy may be filled at the general election in
that same year with party nominations of candidates for such election being
made at a primary election, as provided in section 6-116 of the election law.
If such a vacancy occurs in any year after such last day, it shall be filled
for the remainder of the unexpired term at the general election in the
following year provided, however, that no general election to fill a vacancy
shall be held in the last year of the term, except as provided in paragraph
nine of this subdivision. Party nominations of candidates for a general
election to fill a vacancy for the remainder of the unexpired term shall be
made at a primary election, except as provided in paragraph five of this
subdivision.



      3.   If a special or general election to fill the vacancy on
an interim basis has not been previously held pursuant to paragraphs four,
six, seven and eight of this subdivision, the person elected to fill the
vacancy for the remainder of the unexpired term at a general election shall
take office immediately upon qualification and shall serve until the term
expires. If a special or general election to fill the vacancy on an interim
basis has been previously held, the person elected to fill the vacancy for
the remainder of the unexpired term at a general election shall take office
on January first of the year following such general election and shall serve
until the term expires.



      4.   If a vacancy occurs during the first three years of a
four-year term or in the first year of a two-year term and on or before the
last day in the third year of such a four-year term or the first year of such
a two-year term on which an occurring vacancy may be filled for the remainder
of the unexpired term at a general election with party nominations of
candidates for such election being made at a primary election, as provided in
section 6-116 of the election law, a special or general election to fill the
vacancy on an interim basis shall be held, unless the vacancy occurs less
than ninety days before the next primary election at which party nominations
for a general election to fill the vacancy may be made and on or before the
last day on which an occurring vacancy may be filled for the remainder of the
unexpired term at the general election in the same year in which the vacancy
occurs with party nominations of candidates for such election being made at a
primary election, as provided in section 6-116 of the election law.



      5.   If a vacancy occurs after the last day in the third year
of a four-year term or the first year of a two-year term on which an
occurring vacancy may be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term at a
general election in each year with party nominations of candidates for such
election being made at a primary election, as provided in section 6-116 of
the election law, but not less than ninety days before the date of the
primary election in the fourth year of such a four-year term or the second
year of such a two-year term, a special or general election to fill such
vacancy for the remainder of the unexpired term shall be held.



      6.   Elections held pursuant to paragraph four or five of this
subdivision shall be scheduled in the following manner: A special election to
fill the vacancy shall be held on the first Tuesday at least forty-five days
after the occurrence of the vacancy, provided that the mayor, in the
proclamation required by paragraph one of this subdivision, may schedule such
election for another day no more than ten days after such Tuesday and not
less than forty days after such proclamation if the mayor determines that
such rescheduling is necessary to facilitate maximum voter participation;
except that



         (a)   if the vacancy occurs before September twentieth
in any year and the first Tuesday at least forty-five days after the
occurrence of the vacancy is less than ninety days before a regularly
scheduled general election or between a primary and a general election, the
vacancy shall be filled at such general election;



         (b)   if the vacancy occurs before September twentieth
in any year and the first Tuesday at least forty-five days after the
occurrence of the vacancy is after a regularly scheduled general election,
the vacancy shall be filled at such general election; and



         (c)   if the vacancy occurs on or after September
twentieth in any year and the first Tuesday at least forty-five days after
the occurrence of the vacancy is after, but less than thirty days after, a
regularly scheduled general election, the vacancy shall be filled at a
special election to be held on the first Tuesday in December in such year.



      7.   All nominations for elections to fill vacancies held
pursuant to paragraphs four and five of this subdivision shall be by
independent nominating petition. A signature on an independent nominating
petition made earlier than the date of the proclamation required by paragraph
one of this subdivision shall not be counted.



      8.   A person elected to fill a vacancy in the council at an
election held pursuant to paragraph four of this subdivision shall take
office immediately upon qualification and serve until December thirty-first
of the year in which the vacancy is filled for the remainder of the unexpired
term pursuant to paragraph two of this subdivision. A person elected to fill
a vacancy in the council at an election held pursuant to paragraph five of
this subdivision shall take office immediately upon qualification and serve
until the term expires.



      9.   If a vacancy occurs less than ninety days before the date
of the primary election in the last year of the term, the person elected at
the general election in such year for the next succeeding term shall take
office immediately upon qualification and fill the vacancy for the remainder
of the unexpired term.



Section 26. Salaries and allowances.



   a.   The salary of the public advocate shall be one hundred
eighty-four thousand eight hundred dollars a year.



   b.   The salary of each council member shall be one hundred
forty-eight thousand five hundred dollars a year, except that the salary of
the speaker shall be one hundred sixty-four thousand five hundred dollars a
year. In addition any council member, while serving as a committee
chairperson or other officer of the council, may also be paid, in addition to
such salary, an allowance fixed by resolution, after a hearing, for the
particular and additional services pertaining to the additional duties of
such position.



   c.   If prior to the enactment of a local law increasing the
compensation of council members, the council establishes a commission to
study and make recommendations for changes in the compensation levels of
council members, or if it otherwise causes an analysis of such compensation
levels to be made to assist it in its consideration of a local law, such
study or analysis may include an analysis of the benefits, detriments, costs
and impacts of placing restrictions on earned income derived by council
members from sources other than their council salary.



(Am. L.L. 2016/019, 2/19/2016, retro. eff. 1/1/2016)



Section 27. Local laws and resolutions increasing or decreasing salaries or
allowances.



   No local law or resolution increasing or decreasing the salaries, or
other allowances, in accordance with section twenty-six shall be adopted
during the period between the general election day and the thirty-first day
of December, both such days inclusive, in any year in which all of the
council members are elected.



Section 28. Powers of council.



   a.   The council in addition to all enumerated powers shall have
power to adopt local laws which it deems appropriate, which are not
inconsistent with the provisions of this charter or with the constitution or
laws of the United States or this state, for the good rule and government of
the city; for the order, protection and government of persons and property;
for the preservation of the public health, comfort, peace and prosperity of
the city and its inhabitants; and to effectuate the purposes and provisions
of this charter or of the other law relating to the city. The power of the
council to act with respect to matters set forth in sections one hundred
ninety-seven-c and two hundred shall be limited by the provisions of section
one hundred ninety seven-d.



   b.   The council shall have power to provide for the enforcement of
local laws by legal or equitable proceedings, to prescribe that violations
thereof shall constitute misdemeanors, offenses or infractions and to provide
for the punishment of violations thereof by civil penalty, fine, forfeiture
or imprisonment, or by two or more of such punishments.



   c.   In the event that there exists no other provision of law for
the filling of a vacancy in any elective office, resulting from removal or
suspension from such office, or the death, resignation or inability of the
incumbent to exercise the powers or to discharge the duties of the office,
the council by a majority vote of all the council members shall elect a
successor to fill the vacancy in such office.



   d.   All local laws shall be general, applying either throughout the
whole city or throughout specified portions thereof.



   e.   The council shall not pass any local law authorizing the
placing or continuing of any encroachment or obstruction upon any street or
sidewalk excepting temporary occupation thereof by commercial refuse
containers or during and for the purpose of the erection, repairing or
demolition of a building on a lot abutting thereon under revocable licenses
therefor, and excepting the erection of booths, stands or displays or the
maintenance of sidewalk cafes under licenses to be granted only with the
consent of the owner of the premises if the same shall be located in whole or
in part within stoop lines; any such commercial refuse containers thus placed
or continued upon any street or sidewalk pursuant to such a revocable license
shall be painted with a phosphorescent substance so that the dimensions
thereof shall be clearly discernible at night.



   f.   All local laws in relation to licenses shall fix the license
fees to be paid, if any, and shall provide that all licenses shall be
according to an established form and shall be regularly numbered and duly
registered.



   g.   The council shall hold a public hearing prior to the
consideration of any resolution requesting the state legislature, in
accordance with the provisions of section two of article nine of the
Constitution of the state of New York, to pass any bill, the substance of
which, if adopted by the council as a local law, would require its approval
by the electorate voting thereon at a referendum. Notice of such public
hearing shall be published in the City Record for at least five days
immediately preceding the commencement of such a hearing.



Section 29. Power of investigation and oversight.



   a.   The council, acting as a committee of the whole, and each
standing or special committee of the council, through hearings or otherwise:



      1.   may investigate any matters within its jurisdiction
relating to the property, affairs, or government of the city or of any county
within the city, or to any other powers of the council, or to the
effectuation of the purposes or provisions of this charter or any laws
relating to the city or to any county within the city.



      2.   shall review on a regular and continuous basis the
activities of the agencies of the city, including their service goals and
performance and management efficiency. Each unit of appropriation in the
adopted budget of the city shall be assigned to a standing committee. Each
standing committee of the council shall hold at least one hearing each year
relating to the activities of each of the agencies under its jurisdiction.



   b.   Any standing or special committee shall have power to require
the attendance and examine and take testimony under oath of such persons as
it may deem necessary and to require the production of books, accounts,
papers and other evidence relative to the inquiry. Copies of all reports or
studies received by the council pursuant to section eleven hundred
thirty-four and subdivision c of section ninety-three shall be assigned to
the appropriate standing committees for review and action, as necessary.



Section 30. Council review of city procurement policies and procedures.



   The council shall periodically review all city procurement policies and
procedures, including:



      1.   the rules and procedures adopted by the procurement
policy board, all rules relating to the participation of minority and women
owned business enterprises in the city's procurement process and the
implementation of those rules and procedures by city agencies;



      2.   patterns of contractual spending by city agencies,
including determinations of the need to contract made by agencies in
accordance with rules of the procurement policy board;



      3.   access to and fairness in city procurement opportunities,
the fair distribution of contract awards, and the fair employment practices
of city contractors;



      4.   procedures for evaluating contractor performance; and



      5.   procedures for declaring bidders not responsible and for
debarring contractors.



Section 31. Power of advice and consent.



   Appointment by the mayor of the commissioner of investigation and of
the members of the art commission, board of health (other than the chair),
board of standards and appeals, city planning commission (other than the
chair), civil service commission, landmarks preservation commission, tax
commission, taxi and limousine commission and the public members of the
environmental control board shall be made with the advice and consent of the
council after a public hearing. Within 30 days after the first stated meeting
of the council after receipt of a nomination, the council shall hold a
hearing and act upon such nomination and in the event it does not act within
such period, the nomination shall be deemed to be confirmed.



(Am. L.L. 2016/096, 8/31/2016, eff. 12/29/2016)



Section 32. Local laws.



   Except as otherwise provided by law, all legislative action by the
council shall be by local law. The style of local law shall be "Be it enacted
by the council as follows." Every local law shall embrace only one subject.
The title shall briefly refer to the subject-matter.



Section 33. Local laws and budget modifications; fiscal impact statements.



   a.   No proposed local law or budget modification shall be voted on
by a council committee or the council unless it is accompanied by a fiscal
impact statement containing the information set forth in subdivision b of
this section.



   b.   A fiscal impact statement shall indicate the fiscal year in
which the proposed law or modification would first become effective and the
first fiscal year in which the full fiscal impact of the law or modification
is expected to occur; and contain an estimate of the fiscal impact of the law
or modification on the revenues and expenditures of the city during the
fiscal year in which the law or modification is to first become effective,
during the succeeding fiscal year, and during the first fiscal year in which
the full fiscal impact of the law or modification is expected to occur.



   c.   All agency heads shall promptly provide to any council
committee any information that it requests to assist it in preparing a fiscal
impact statement.



   d.   Each fiscal impact statement shall identify the sources of
information used in its preparation.



   e.   If the estimate or estimates contained in the fiscal impact
statement are inaccurate, such inaccuracies shall not affect, impair, or
invalidate the local law or budget modification.



Section 34. Vote required for local law or resolution.



   Except as otherwise provided by law, no local law or resolution shall
be passed except by at least the majority affirmative vote of all the council
members.



Section 35. Ayes and noes.



   a.   On the final passage of a local law or resolution the question
shall be taken by ayes and noes, which shall be entered in the journal of
proceedings. No such vote may be cast except by a council member who is
present and who casts his or her own vote in the manner prescribed by the
rules of the council.



   b.   All committee votes on proposed local laws or resolutions shall
be taken by ayes and noes, which shall be entered in a committee report a
copy of which shall be filed with the clerk or other official specified by
the council rules for this purpose and which shall be available for public
inspection. No such vote may be cast except by a member of the committee who
is present at the meeting at which the vote is taken.



Section 36. Local laws; passage.



   No local law shall be passed until it shall have been in its final form
and upon the desks of the council members at least seven calendar days,
exclusive of Sundays, prior to its final passage, unless the mayor shall have
certified as to the necessity for its immediate passage and such local law be
passed by the affirmative vote of two-thirds of all the council members.



   For purposes of this section, a local law shall be deemed to be upon
the desks of the council members if: it is set forth in a legible electronic
format by electronic means, and it is available for review in such format at
the desks of the members. For purposes of this section "electronic means"
means any method of transmission of information between computers or other
machines designed for the purpose of sending and receiving such transmissions
and which: allows the recipient to reproduce the information transmitted in a
tangible medium of expression; and does not permit additions, deletions or
other changes to be made without leaving an adequate record thereof.



Section 37. Local laws; action by mayor.



   a.   Every local law certified by the clerk of the council, after
its passage by the council, shall be presented to the mayor for approval.



   b.   If the mayor approves the local law, the mayor shall sign it
and return it to the clerk; it shall then be deemed to have been adopted. If
the mayor disapproves it, he or she shall return it to the clerk with his or
her objections stated in writing and the clerk shall present the same with
such objections to the council at its next regular meeting and such
objections shall be entered in its journal. The council within thirty days
thereafter may reconsider the same. If after such reconsideration the votes
of two-thirds of all the council members be cast in favor of repassing such
local law, it shall be deemed adopted, notwithstanding the objections of the
mayor. Only one vote shall be had upon such reconsideration. The vote shall
be taken by ayes and noes, which shall be entered in the journal. If within
thirty days after the local law shall have been presented to him or her, the
mayor shall neither approve nor return the local law to the clerk with his or
her objections, it shall be deemed to have been adopted in like manner as if
the mayor had signed it. At any time prior to the return of a local law by
the mayor, the council may recall the same and reconsider its action thereon.



Section 38. Local laws; referendum.



   A local law shall be submitted for the approval of the electors at the
next general election held not less than sixty days after the adoption
thereof, and shall become operative as prescribed therein only when approved
at such election by the affirmative vote of a majority of the qualified
electors of the city voting upon the proposition, if it:



      1.   Abolishes or changes the form or composition of the
council or increases or decreases the number of votes any member is entitled
to cast or reduces the number of districts from which council members shall
be elected.



      2.   Changes the veto power of the mayor.



      3.   Changes the law of succession to the mayoralty.



      4.   Abolishes an elective office, or changes the method of
nominating, electing or removing an elective officer, or changes the term of
an elective officer, or reduces the salary of an elective officer during his
or her term of office.



      5.   Abolishes, transfers or curtails any power of an elective
officer.



      6.   Creates a new elective office.



      7.   Changes a provision of law relating to public utility
franchises.



      8.   Changes a provision of law relating to the membership or
terms of office of the city civil service commission.



      9.   Reduces the salary or compensation of a city officer or
employee or increases the hours of employment or changes the working
conditions of such officer or employee if such salary, compensation, hours or
conditions have been fixed by a state statute and approved by the vote of the
qualified electors of the city; and no provision effecting such reductions,
increases or changes contained in any local law or proposed new charter shall
become effective unless the definite question with respect to such
reductions, increases or changes shall be separately submitted and approved
by the affirmative vote of a majority of the qualified electors voting
thereon.



      10.   Provides a new charter for the city.



      11.   Transfers powers vested by this charter in an agency the
head of which is appointed by the mayor to an agency the head of which is not
so appointed or vice versa, other than transfers of power authorized by this
charter from an agency the head of which is appointed by the mayor to a
community board, borough president or a borough board.



      12.   Dispenses with a provision of this charter requiring a
public notice and hearing as a condition precedent to official action.



      13.   Dispenses with a requirement of this charter for public
bidding or for public letting of contracts except as otherwise provided
pursuant to chapter thirteen of this charter.



      14.   Changes a provision of this charter governing the
classes or character of city bonds or other obligations, the purposes for
which or the amount in which any class of obligations may be issued.



      15.   Removes restrictions in this charter on the sale, lease
or other disposition of city property.



      16.   Curtails the powers of the city planning commission, or
changes the vote in the council required to take action without or contrary
to the recommendation of the city planning commission.



      17.   Repeals or amends this section or any of the following
sections of this charter; sections forty, one hundred ninety-one, one hundred
ninety-two, one hundred ninety-three, one hundred ninety-nine, two hundred,
two hundred seventeen, eleven hundred ten, eleven hundred eleven, eleven
hundred fifteen, eleven hundred sixteen, eleven hundred seventeen, eleven
hundred eighteen, and eleven hundred twenty-three.



      18.   Repeals or amends sections twenty-six hundred one,
twenty-six hundred four, twenty-six hundred five, and twenty-six hundred six
insofar as they relate to elected officials and section twenty-six hundred
two.



Section 39. Reconsideration.



   At any time prior to the election at which a local law is to be
submitted to the electors for approval pursuant to this charter, the council,
not later than fifteen days prior to the election, may reconsider its action
thereon and repeal such local law without submission to the mayor, whereupon
the proposition for its approval shall not be submitted at such election, or
if submitted the vote of the electors thereon shall be without effect.



Section 40. Amendment of charter.



   Amendments to this charter may be adopted by any of the following
methods:



   1.   By local law adopted in accordance with the provisions of this
charter.



   2.   By vote of the electors of the city upon the petition of
electors of the city, an amendment may be adopted.



      (a)   in relation to the manner of voting for the elective
officers of the city or any of them, or



      (b)   abolishing any elective office or offices or creating a
new office or offices, including if so provided a transfer of powers to the
newly created office or offices or a disposition of the powers of any office
abolished, but no such amendment shall repeal or change any limitations
contained in this charter on any power.



      (c)   such amendment may be adopted in the manner following:



         (1)   Not less than fifty thousand qualified electors of
the city may file in the office of the city clerk a petition for the
submission to the electors of the city at the next general election therein
held not less than sixty days after filing of such petition of such a
proposed amendment or amendments to the charter to be set forth in full in
the petition. The petition may be made upon separate sheets and the
signatures of each shall be authenticated in the manner provided by the
Election Law for the authentication of designating petitions. The several
sheets so signed and authenticated when fastened together and offered for
filing shall be deemed to constitute one petition. A signature made earlier
than one hundred twenty days before the filing of the petition shall not be
counted. If within ten days after the filing of such petition a written
objection thereto be filed with the office of the city clerk, the Supreme
Court or any justice thereof of the first, second or eleventh judicial
district shall determine any question arising thereunder and make such order
as justice may require. Such proceedings shall be heard and determined in the
manner prescribed by the election law in relation to judicial proceedings
thereunder.



         (2)   If such proposed amendment or amendments receive
the affirmative vote of the majority of the qualified electors of the city
voting thereon, it or they shall take effect as prescribed therein.



   3.   In such other manner as may be provided by law.



Section 41. Submission of local laws or amendments.



   A proposition for the submission of a local law or an amendment to this
charter for the approval of the electors pursuant to this charter shall
contain the title of such local law or a brief statement of the subject of
such amendment. The city clerk with the advice of the corporation counsel
shall prepare an abstract of such local law or amendment concisely stating
the title or subject and the purpose and effect thereof in clear language,
and forthwith shall transmit such proposition and such abstract to the
election officers charged with the duty of publishing the notice of and
furnishing the supplies for such election. A sufficient number of copies of
such abstract shall be printed, in such manner that the abstract shall appear
with the question to appear on the ballot in bold type and separately from
the text of the proposition, and shall be delivered with the other election
supplies and distributed to the electors at the time of the registration of
voters and at the election. If there be more than one such proposition to be
voted upon at such election, each such proposition shall be separately,
consecutively and consistently numbered on the ballot and on the abstract. In
case of a conflict between two local laws or two amendments adopted at the
same election, the one receiving the largest affirmative vote shall control.



Section 42. Meetings.



   The first meeting of the council in each year shall be held on the
first Wednesday after the first Monday of January at noon. All meetings of
the council shall be held as provided by its rules; provided, however, that
at least two stated meetings shall be held each month, except in its
discretion in July and August. A majority of the council members shall
constitute a quorum. At least thirty-six hours prior to a stated meeting of
the council, or as soon as practicable prior to a special meeting, the
council shall publish and make publicly available a proposed agenda for such
meeting, including a list of all proposed local laws or resolutions to be
considered at such meetings.



Section 43. Special meetings.



   The mayor may at any time call special meetings of the council. He
shall also call a special meeting when a requisition for that purpose signed
by five council members has been presented to him. Not less than one day
before a special meeting is held, notice of the time thereof and of the
business proposed to be transacted, signed by the mayor, shall be published
in the City Record, and at the same time the city clerk shall cause a copy of
such notice to be left at or sent by post to the usual place of abode or of
business of each council member; but want of service of a notice upon any
council member shall not affect the validity of the meeting. No business
shall be transacted at such special meetings other than that specified in the
notice relating thereto.



Section 44. Speaker.



   The council shall elect from among its members a speaker and such other
officers as it deems appropriate. The speaker shall preside over the meetings
of the council. During any period when the public advocate is acting as
mayor, or when a vacancy exists in the office of the public advocate, the
speaker shall act as public advocate pending the filling of the vacancy
pursuant to subdivision c of section twenty-four, and shall be a member of
every board of which the public advocate is a member by virtue of his or her
office.



Section 45. Sergeant-at-arms; procedure; expulsion of members.



   The council may elect a sergeant-at-arms and such research, drafting,
clerical and other assistants as are needful to its purposes, within the
appropriation provided therefor. It may appoint committees and shall appoint
a finance committee properly staffed to consider budgetary and related
matters and a land use committee consisting of at least one council member
from each borough; shall be the judge of the election returns and
qualifications of its own members, subject, however, to review by any court
of competent jurisdiction; shall keep a public journal of its proceedings;
shall make a complete transcript of each of its meetings and committee
hearings available for public inspection free of charge within sixty days
after such meeting or hearing and provide a copy of any requested pages of
such transcript at a reasonable fee to cover copying and, if relevant,
mailing costs; shall sit with open doors; shall have authority to compel the
attendance of absent members and to punish its members for disorderly
behavior, and to expel any member, after charges and a hearing, with the
concurrence of two-thirds of all the council members.



Section 46. Rules of the council.



   The council shall determine the rules of its own proceedings at the
first stated meeting of the council in each year and shall file a copy with
the city clerk. Such rules shall include, but not be limited to, rules that
the chairs of all standing committees be elected by the council as a whole;
that the first-named sponsor of a proposed local law or resolution be able to
require a committee vote on such proposed local law or resolution; that a
majority of the members of the council be able to discharge a proposed local
law or resolution from committee; that committees shall provide reasonable
advance notice of committee meetings to the public; that all committee votes
be recorded and made available to the public; that for council members,
earning outside income, as defined in such rules, is prohibited.



(Am. L.L. 2016/020, 2/19/2016)



Section 47. Legislative professional staff.



   Within appropriations for such purpose, the council shall establish a
structure within the City Council and retain professional staff to review and
analyze proposed budgets and departmental estimates, requests for new taxes
or changes in taxes, budget modifications, capital borrowings and mayoral
management reports. Such staff shall assist the committees of the council and
Council Members in their analysis of proposed legislation and in review of
the performance and management of city agencies.



Section 48. City clerk; duties.



   a.   The council shall appoint a clerk, who shall perform such
duties as may be prescribed by law. The clerk so appointed shall be the city
clerk and the clerk of the council, and shall hold office for six years and
until such clerk's successor shall be appointed and has qualified. The city
clerk shall have charge of all the papers and documents of the city, except
such as are by law committed to the keeping of the several departments or of
other officers. The city clerk shall keep the record of the proceedings of
the council and shall also keep a separate record of all the local laws of
the city in a book to be provided for that purpose, with proper indices,
which book shall be deemed a public record of such local laws, and each local
law shall be attested by said clerk. Copies of all papers duly filed in the
office of the city clerk, and transcripts thereof and of the records of
proceedings of the council and copies of the laws, ordinances and local laws
of the city, certified by the city clerk under the corporate seal of the
city, shall be admissible in evidence in all courts and places in the same
manner and for the same purposes as papers or documents similarly
authenticated by the clerk of a county. The city clerk may be removed on
charges by a two-third vote of all the council members, subject, however, to
judicial review. The city clerk shall collect such fees as shall be fixed by
law.



   b.   It shall be the duty of the city clerk to keep open for
inspection at all reasonable times the records and minutes of the proceedings
of the council. The city clerk shall keep the seal of the city, and his or
her signature shall be necessary to all grants and other documents, except as
otherwise provided by law. In the absence of the clerk by sickness or
otherwise, the first deputy clerk shall be vested with and possessed of all
the rights and powers and be charged with all the duties by law imposed upon
the clerk. In the absence of the first deputy clerk, the city clerk by an
instrument in writing may designate one of his or her clerks, who shall be
vested with and possessed of all the rights and powers and charged with all
the duties by law imposed upon said clerk. The signature of the person so
designated shall be in place of and of the same force and effect as the
signature of the city clerk. Such designation shall be made in triplicate and
shall be duly filed and remain of record in the city clerk's office and in
the offices of the mayor and of the comptroller, but the designation shall be
for a period not exceeding three months and shall not extend beyond the city
clerk's term of office and shall be at all times revocable by the city clerk.



Section 49. Members not to be questioned for speeches.



   For any speech or debate in the council and any committee or
subcommittee thereof, the members shall not be questioned in any other place.



Chapter 2-A: Districting Commission



Section 50. Districting Commission; composition; appointment; terms;
vacancies; compensation.



   a.   There shall be a districting commission consisting of fifteen
members appointed as provided in this section.



      1.   The council delegation of the political party which has
the largest delegation in the council shall, by majority vote, appoint five
members of the commission, no more than one of whom may be a resident of the
same borough.



      2.   The council delegation of the political party which has
the second largest delegation in the council, shall, by majority vote,
appoint three members of the commission, no more than one of whom may be a
resident of the same borough.



      3.   If only one political party has a council delegation,
then the chairpersons of the county committees of the political party with no
council delegation which, at the time of the general election last preceding
the time at which such appointments are required to be made, had the largest
number of enrolled voters in the city, shall each submit three nominations to
the mayor, in order to provide a list of fifteen nominations from that party.
The mayor shall appoint three members from such list, no more than one of
whom may be a resident of the same borough.



      4.   The mayor shall appoint seven additional members, but the
party enrollment, if any, of these additional members shall be such that
individuals enrolled in a single political party shall not be a majority of
the total number of members of the commission.



      5.   Officers and employees of the city or any city agency,
lobbyists required to file a statement of registration under federal, state
or local law, the employees of such lobbyists, federal, state and local
elected officials, and officers of any political party shall not be eligible
to be members of the commission.



      6.   The members of the commission shall elect one of the
fifteen members to serve as the chair of the commission.



      7.   For purposes of this section, a member of the council who
was elected to the council upon the nomination of more than one political
party shall be considered to be a member of the council delegation of the
political party on whose ballot line he or she received the largest number of
votes in his or her last election to the council.



   b.   1.   The commission shall have among its members (a) at
least one resident of each borough, and (b) members of the racial and
language minority groups in New York city which are protected by the United
States voting rights act of nineteen hundred sixty-five, as amended, in
proportion, as close as practicable, to their population in the city.



      2.   The mayor, no later than twenty-two months before the
general election of the council to be held in the year nineteen hundred and
ninety-three, and every ten years thereafter, shall convene one or more
meetings of all of the appointing and recommending authorities specified in
subdivision a of this section for the purpose of establishing a screening and
selection process for ensuring that the racial and language minority groups
in New York city which are protected by the United States voting rights act
of nineteen hundred sixty-five, as amended, will be fairly represented on the
commission.



   c.   Each council delegation authorized by subdivision a of this
section to make appointments to the commission shall make such appointments
no earlier than one year and eight months before, and no later than one year
and six months before, the general election of the council to be held in the
year nineteen hundred ninety-three, and every ten years thereafter. In any
case in which the chairpersons of the county committees of a political party
are authorized to submit nominations to the mayor, such nominations shall be
submitted no earlier than one year and eight months before, and no later than
one year and six months before, the general election of the council to be
held in the year nineteen hundred ninety-three, and every ten years
thereafter. The mayor shall make appointments to the commission after each
council delegation authorized to make appointments has done so but not later
than one year and five months before such a general election of the council.
The commission's term shall end sixty days after the day of the first general
election of the council following the commission's adoption of a districting
plan, as set forth in section fifty-one.



   d.   In the event of a vacancy by death, resignation or otherwise, a
new member enrolled in the same political party from which his or her
predecessor was selected shall be appointed in the same manner as the member
whose departure from the commission created the vacancy to serve the balance
of the term remaining.



   e.   No member of the districting commission shall be removed from
office except by the person or persons who appointed such member and only for
cause and upon notice and hearing.



   f.   The members of the commission shall serve without compensation
except that each member shall be allowed actual and necessary expenses to be
audited in the same manner as other city charges.



   g.   The commission may hire or contract for necessary staff
assistance and may require agencies of city government to provide technical
assistance. The commission shall have a budget as provided by the mayor.



Section 51. Powers and duties of the commission; hearings; submissions and
approval of plan.



   a.   Following each decennial census, the commission shall prepare a
plan for dividing the city into districts for the election of council
members. In preparing the plan, the commission shall be guided by the
criteria set forth in section fifty-two.



   b.   The commission shall hold one or more public hearings not less
than one month before it submits its plan to the city council, in accordance
with subdivision c of this section. The commission shall make its plan
available to the public for inspection and comment not less than one month
before the first such public hearing.



   c.   The commission shall submit its plan to the city council not
less than one year before the general election of the city council to be held
in the year nineteen hundred ninety-three and every ten years thereafter.



   d.   The plan submitted in accordance with subdivision c of this
section shall be deemed adopted unless within three weeks, the council by the
vote of a majority of all of its members adopts a resolution objecting to
such plan and returns the plan to the commission with such resolution and a
statement of its objections, and with copies of the written objections of any
individual members of the council who have submitted objections to the
speaker prior to such date. Any objections from individual members submitted
to the speaker by such date shall be transmitted to the districting
commission whether or not the council objects to such districting plan.



   e.   Upon the receipt of any such resolution and objections, the
commission shall prepare a revised plan and shall, no later than ten months
before such general election of the city council, make such plan available to
the council and the public for inspection and comment. The commission shall
hold public hearings and seek public comment on such revised plan.



   f.   Following its consideration of the comments received pursuant
to subdivision e of this section, the commission shall, no later than eight
months before such general election of the council, prepare and submit a
final plan for the redistricting of the council.



   g.   Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivision d or subdivision
f of this section, no plan shall be deemed adopted in accordance with either
of such subdivisions until the commission files, with the city clerk, a copy
of such plan and a statement signed by at least nine members of the
commission certifying that, within the constraint of paragraph a of
subdivision one of section fifty-two, the criteria set forth in the other
paragraphs of such subdivision have been applied in the order in which they
are listed and that such criteria have been implemented, in such order, to
the maximum extent practicable. Such certification shall also set forth the
manner in which the commission implemented the requirements of paragraph b of
subdivision one of section fifty-two. Such plan shall be deemed adopted upon
the commission's filing with the city clerk of such plan and such
certification.



   h.   After the commission files its final plan with the city clerk
pursuant to subdivision g of this section, the commission shall take all
steps necessary to ensure that such plan is effectuated, including but not
limited to submitting such plan for preclearance by the United States
department of justice pursuant to the United States voting rights act of
nineteen hundred sixty-five, as amended, and making such adjustments in its
plan as may be necessary and appropriate to respond to a determination of a
court or the United States department of justice.



Section 52. District plan; criteria.



   1.   In the preparation of its plan for dividing the city into
districts for the election of council members, the commission shall apply the
criteria set forth in the following paragraphs to the maximum extent
practicable. The following paragraphs shall be applied and given priority in
the order in which they are listed.



      a.   The difference in population between the least populous
and the most populous districts shall not exceed ten percentum (10%) of the
average population for all districts, according to figures available from the
most recent decennial census. Any such differences in population must be
justified by the other criteria set forth in this section.



      b.   Such districting plan shall be established in a manner
that ensures the fair and effective representation of the racial and language
minority groups in New York city which are protected by the United States
voting rights act of nineteen hundred sixty-five, as amended.



      c.   District lines shall keep intact neighborhoods and
communities with established ties of common interest and association, whether
historical, racial, economic, ethnic, religious or other.



      d.   Each district shall be compact and shall be no more than
twice as long as it is wide.



      e.   A district shall not cross borough or county boundaries.



      f.   Districts shall not be drawn for the purpose of
separating geographic concentrations of voters enrolled in the same political
party into two or more districts in order to diminish the effective
representation of such voters.



      g.   The districting plan shall be established in a manner
that minimizes the sum of the length of the boundaries of all of the
districts included in the plan.



   2.   Each district shall be contiguous, and whenever a part of a
district is separated from the rest of the district by a body of water, there
shall be a connection by a bridge, a tunnel, a tramway or by regular ferry
service.



   3.   If any district includes territory in two boroughs, then no
other district may also include territory from the same two boroughs.



Chapter 3: Board of Estimate [Repealed]



 



Chapter 4: Borough Presidents.



Section 81. Qualifications; election; term; salary; removal; vacancy.



   a.   There shall be a president of each borough, who shall be a
resident thereof at the time of election and remain a resident thereof
throughout the term of office.



   b.   The borough president shall be elected by the electors of the
borough at the same time and for the same term as in this charter prescribed
for the mayor. A borough president who resigns or is removed from office
prior to the completion of a full term shall be deemed to have served a full
term for purposes of section 1138 of the charter.



   c.   The salary of the borough president shall be one hundred
seventy-nine thousand two hundred dollars a year.



   d.   A president of a borough may be removed or suspended in the
same manner as provided in this charter with respect to the mayor.



   e.   Any vacancy in the office of a borough president shall be
filled by popular election in the manner set forth in this subdivision. Until
an interim or permanent successor is first elected, the deputy borough
president or the executive assistant, in the order of priority specified by
the borough president pursuant to subdivision one of section eighty-two,
shall act as borough president.



      1.   Within three days of the occurrence of a vacancy in a
borough presidency, the mayor shall proclaim the date for the election or
elections required by this subdivision, provide notice of such proclamation
to the city clerk and the board of elections and publish notice thereof in
the City Record. After the proclamation of the date for an election to be
held pursuant to paragraphs four or five of this subdivision, the city clerk
shall publish notice thereof not less than twice in each week preceding the
date of such election in newspapers distributed within the city, and the
board of elections shall mail notice of such election to all registered
voters within the appropriate borough.



      2.   If a vacancy occurs during the first three years of the
term, a general election to fill the vacancy for the remainder of the
unexpired term shall be held in the year in which the vacancy occurs, unless
the vacancy occurs after the last day on which an occurring vacancy may be
filled at the general election in that same year with party nominations of
candidates for such election being made at a primary election, as provided in
section 6-116 of the election law. If such a vacancy occurs in any year after
such last day, it shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term at
the general election in the following year provided, however, that no general
election to fill a vacancy shall be held in the last year of the term, except
as provided in paragraph nine of this subdivision. Party nominations of
candidates for a general election to fill a vacancy for the remainder of the
unexpired term shall be made at a primary election, except as provided in
paragraph five of this subdivision.



      3.   If a special or general election to fill the vacancy on
an interim basis has not been previously held pursuant to paragraphs four,
six, seven and eight of this subdivision, the person elected to fill the
vacancy for the remainder of the unexpired term at a general election shall
take office immediately upon qualification and shall serve until the term
expires. If a special or general election to fill the vacancy on an interim
basis has been previously held, the person elected to fill the vacancy for
the remainder of the unexpired term at a general election shall take office
on January first of the year following such general election and shall serve
until the term expires.



      4.   If a vacancy occurs during the first three years of the
term and on or before the last day in the third year of the term on which an
occurring vacancy may be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term at a
general election with party nominations of candidates for such election being
made at a primary election, as provided in section 6-116 of the election law,
a special or general election to fill the vacancy on an interim basis shall
be held, unless the vacancy occurs less than ninety days before the next
primary election at which party nominations for a general election to fill
the vacancy may be made and on or before the last day on which an occurring
vacancy may be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term at the general
election in the same year in which the vacancy occurs with party nominations
of candidates for such election being made at a primary election, as provided
in section 6-116 of the election law.



      5.   If a vacancy occurs after the last day in the third year
of the term on which an occurring vacancy may be filled for the remainder of
the unexpired term at a general election in each year with party nominations
of candidates for such election being made at a primary election, as provided
in section 6-116 of the election law, but not less than ninety days before
the date of the primary election in the fourth year of such term, a special
or general election to fill such vacancy for the remainder of the unexpired
term shall be held.



      6.   Elections held pursuant to paragraph four or five of this
subdivision shall be scheduled in the following manner: A special election to
fill the vacancy shall be held on the first Tuesday at least forty-five days
after the occurrence of the vacancy, provided that the mayor, in the
proclamation required by paragraph one of this subdivision, may schedule such
election for another day no more than ten days after such Tuesday and not
less than forty days after such proclamation if the mayor determines that
such rescheduling is necessary to facilitate maximum voter participation;
except that



         (a)   if the vacancy occurs before September twentieth
in any year and the first Tuesday at least forty-five days after the
occurrence of the vacancy is less than ninety days before a regularly
scheduled general election or between a primary and a general election, the
vacancy shall be filled at such general election; and



         (b)   if the vacancy occurs before September twentieth
in any year and the first Tuesday at least forty-five days after the
occurrence of the vacancy is after a regularly scheduled general election,
the vacancy shall be filled at such general election; and



         (c)   if the vacancy occurs on or after September
twentieth in any year and the first Tuesday at least forty-five days after
the occurrence of the vacancy is after, but less than thirty days after, a
regularly scheduled general election, the vacancy shall be filled at a
special election to be held on the first Tuesday in December in such year.



      7.   All nominations for elections to fill vacancies held
pursuant to paragraphs four and five of this subdivision shall be by
independent nominating petition. A signature on an independent nominating
petition made earlier than the date of the proclamation required by paragraph
one of this subdivision shall not be counted.



      8.   A person elected to fill a vacancy in a borough
presidency at an election held pursuant to paragraph four of this subdivision
shall take office immediately upon qualification and serve until December
thirty-first of the year in which the vacancy is filled for the remainder of
the unexpired term pursuant to paragraph two of this subdivision. A person
elected to fill a vacancy in a borough presidency at an election held
pursuant to paragraph five of this subdivision shall take office immediately
upon qualification and serve until the term expires.



      9.   If a vacancy occurs less than ninety days before the date
of the primary election in the last year of the term, the person elected at
the general election in such year for the next succeeding term shall take
office immediately upon qualification and fill the vacancy for the remainder
of the unexpired term.



(Am. L.L. 2016/019, 2/19/2016, retro. eff. 1/1/2016)



Section 82. Powers and duties.



   The president of a borough shall:



      1.   Appoint and may at pleasure remove a deputy and an
executive assistant, either of whom may discharge such of the powers of the
president of the borough as the president by instrument in writing, filed in
the borough president's office and with the city clerk and each board, body
or committee of which the borough president is a member, may delegate to
either of them either the deputy or the executive assistant, designated
pursuant to this subdivision, in the order of priority specified by the
president in such instrument, shall, when such office becomes vacant, or when
such president is prevented from attending to the duties of the office, by
reason of sickness, absence from the city or suspension from office,
temporarily act as such president.



      2.   Have power to appoint a secretary and such assistants,
clerks and subordinates as such borough president may deem necessary, within
the appropriation therefor. The said secretary, assistants, clerks and
subordinates shall hold office at the pleasure of the president, subject to
the provisions of the civil service law.



      3.   Continue to maintain a topographical bureau for such
borough and appoint the director of the bureau who shall also serve as
construction coordinator and consulting engineer for the borough and shall
have qualifications as a licensed professional engineer. In addition to other
duties, the director of the bureau shall monitor capital projects in the
borough and shall be available to serve as an expediter on construction
projects in the borough and provide technical assistance with respect to
construction projects.



      4.   Have power to recommend capital projects.



      5.   Have power to hold public hearings on matters of public
interest.



      6.   Make recommendations to the mayor and to other city
officials in the interests of the people of the borough.



      7.   Within appropriations therefor, establish and maintain a
budget office for the borough to assist the borough president in the
preparation of budget proposals, review and analysis of proposed budgets,
departmental estimates, budget modifications and other fiscal matters under
the jurisdiction of the president of the borough.



      8.   Consult with the mayor in the preparation of the
executive expense budget and the executive capital budget and submit proposed
appropriations and other budget recommendations to the mayor and the council
in accordance with chapters three, six, and nine of the charter.



      9.   Establish and maintain a planning office for the borough
to assist the borough president in planning for the growth, improvement and
development of the borough; reviewing and making recommendations regarding
applications and proposals for the use, development or improvement of land
located within the borough; preparing environmental analyses required by law;
providing technical assistance to the community boards within the borough;
and performing such other planning functions as are assigned to the borough
president by this charter or other law.



      10.   Monitor and make recommendations regarding the
performance of contracts providing for the delivery of services in the
borough and, when the borough president deems it appropriate, require that a
hearing be held in the borough by a contract performance panel.



      11.   Have power to have legislation introduced in the
council; such proposed legislation shall indicate that it was introduced at
the behest of the borough president.



      12.   Provide training and technical assistance to the members
of community boards within the borough.



      13.   Oversee the coordination of a borough-wide public
service complaint program and report to the mayor, council president and
public on recurring complaints of borough residents and the borough
president's recommendations for improving the city's response to such
complaints.



      14.   On or before the first day of September nineteen hundred
ninety, and every four years thereafter, prepare a strategic policy statement
for the borough and provide copies of such statement to the mayor, council
and community boards in the borough. Such statement shall include: (i) a
summary of the most significant long-term issues faced by the borough; (ii)
policy goals related to such issues; and (iii) proposed strategies for
meeting such goals. In preparing the statement, the borough president shall
consult with the community boards in the borough.



      15.   Make a complete transcript of each public hearing called
by the borough president available for public inspection free of charge
within sixty days after the hearing and provide a copy of any requested pages
of such transcript at a reasonable fee to cover copying and, if relevant,
mailing costs.



      16.   Perform such other functions and duties and exercise
such other powers as may be assigned by law.



      17.   a.   No later than July 1, 2019, and by July 1 of
each year thereafter, each borough president shall submit to the mayor and
the speaker of the council and shall make available on the borough
president's website a report in a format that is searchable and downloadable
that shall include the following information for the previous calendar year,
or as otherwise specified:



            (i)   The names of persons serving in community
board member positions in the previous calendar year, disaggregated by
community district, including the first date of appointment, dates of
reappointment, if any, length of service, nominating council member or other
nominating party, and community board leadership positions, if any;



            (ii)   Demographic information about community
board members voluntarily disclosed pursuant to clause (v) of subparagraph 1
of paragraph b of this subdivision for each community board in an aggregate
form that is anonymized. provided, however, that age shall be reported in 10
year age ranges, and provided further that no information shall be required
to be reported pursuant to this subparagraph if such information may be
withheld from disclosure pursuant to article 6 of the New York public
officers law;



            (iii)   The number of vacant community board
member positions within the borough, disaggregated by community district;



            (iv)   A description of the borough president's
recruitment plan for filling vacant community board member positions,
including:



               (a)   A description of outreach efforts to
publicize community board member openings; and



               (b)   The particular methods used to seek
out candidates for membership from diverse backgrounds, including with regard
to race, ethnicity, gender, age, disability status, sexual orientation,
language, geographic residence, and other characteristics the borough
president deems relevant to promoting diversity and inclusion of
under-represented groups and communities within community boards:



            (v)   The number of applicants for open community
board member positions received, disaggregated by community district;



            (vi)   The number of persons interviewed for open
community board member positions, disaggregated by community district;



            (vii)   A general description of the evaluation
criteria followed in the selection process;



            (viii)   Any particular tools employed by such
borough president in the selection process, such as the use of a screening
panel;



         b.   1.   Each borough president shall make available
on the borough president's website an application for community board member
positions, which shall include, but not be limited to, the following
information regarding the applicant:



               (i)   Name and address;



               (ii)   Residence, business, professional or
other significant interest in the community district;



               (iii)   Past service on a community board,
including prior appointment dates and number and length of prior terms served;



               (iv)   Age, if less than 18 years old, or a
certification that the applicant is at least 18 years old;



               (v)   The option to provide additional
demographic information, including age, gender, race, ethnicity, sexual
orientation, disability status, languages spoken, or other demographic
information the applicant chooses to disclose, together with a notification
that such information will be made public in aggregate and anonymized form as
provided in subparagraph (ii) of paragraph a of this subdivision;



               (vi)   Work and education history, special
skills, and professional licenses;



               (vii)   Relevant professional, civic or
community involvement experience;



               (viii)   Disclosure of city employment as
such term is used in subdivision (a) of section 2800;



               (ix)   Disclosure of potential conflicts of
interest;



               (x)   Statement describing the applicant's
interest in the community board member position;



               (xi)   A certification that the applicant
meets all requirements for the position of community board member pursuant to
subdivision a of section 2800 and section 1135 and any other applicable law
and, if appointed, will abide by all applicable conflicts of interest laws;
and



               (xii)   Any additional information that the
borough president determines to be relevant or necessary to the application
process.



            2.   The department of information technology and
telecommunications shall provide assistance to borough presidents in
developing such an application and making the application readily accessible
to the public online.



(Am. L.L. 2018/211, 12/3/2018, eff. 1/1/2019)



Section 83. Organization of office.



   Any borough president to the extent to which the organization of such
borough president's office is not prescribed by law, may organize such
borough president's office into such divisions, bureaus or offices and make
such assignments of powers and duties among them, and from time to time
change such organization or assignments as the borough president may consider
advisable.



Section 85. Borough board.



   a.   There shall be in each borough a board to be known as the
borough board which shall consist of the borough president and the district
council members from such borough, and the chairperson of each community
board in the borough. The borough president shall be the chairperson of such
board, which shall hold public hearings at stated intervals in the borough
and report to the council, the mayor and the city planning commission on
borough programs and proposed borough capital projects. The borough
president, the council members from the borough and the chairperson of the
community boards in the borough shall be voting members of the borough board
but a member from a community board shall vote only on issues that directly
affect the community district represented by such member. The borough board
shall employ technical and clerical assistance within appropriations for such
purposes, and the borough president shall provide necessary additional staff
assistance.



   b.   Each borough board shall:



      (1)   Cooperate with community boards and city agencies with
respect to matters relating to the welfare of the borough and its residents;



      (2)   In its discretion hold or conduct public or private
hearings;



      (3)   Adopt by-laws and meet at least once a month but no
formal action of the board shall be taken except at a meeting open to the
public;



      (4)   Assist agencies that deliver services within the borough
in the preparation of service statements for the borough and review such
statements;



      (5)   Prepare comprehensive and special purpose plans for the
physical growth, improvement and development of the borough;



      (6)   Review and make recommendations with respect to
applications and proposals of public agencies and private entities for the
use, development, or improvement of land located in more than one district;



      (7)   Mediate disputes and conflicts among two or more
community districts in the borough;



      (8)   Submit a comprehensive statement of the expense and
capital budget priorities and needs of the borough;



      (9)   Evaluate the progress of capital developments within the
borough and the quality and quantity of services provided by agencies within
the borough;



      (10)   Give notice of all its public meetings and hearings,
and make such meetings and hearings available for broadcasting and
cablecasting;



      (11)   Keep a public record of its activities and
transactions, including minutes of meetings, majority and minority reports,
by-laws, and all documents which the board is required by law to review; such
documents shall, in accordance with law, be made available to elected
officials upon request and for reasonable public inspection; and



      (12)   Otherwise consider the needs of the borough.



   c.   A majority of the members of any borough board entitled to vote
on a matter before such board shall constitute a quorum of such board for
action on such board.



   d.   Whenever any act is authorized to be done or any determination
or decision made by any borough board, the act, determination or decision of
the majority of the members present entitled to vote during the presence of a
quorum, shall be held to be the act, determination or decision of such board.



   e.   Any borough board may adopt rules permitting a member to
designate a representative to exercise all the power of such member as a
member of the borough board. Such a representative shall be considered a
member of the board for the purpose of determining a quorum of the borough
board.



Section 86. Opening and closing streets.



   Except in the case of an emergency, no person, agency, business,
association, or corporation shall remove the pavement, disturb the surface or
otherwise open or close a street, road or highway until a written notice is
filed at least ten days in advance of the intended action with the
construction coordinator and consulting engineer for the borough in the
office of the borough president and the office of district manager for the
community district in which the street, road or highway is located. In the
event of an emergency, such notice may be made in person or by telephone
before the action is instituted and in writing immediately after the action
is instituted. If this is not feasible, notice shall be made in person or by
telephone and in writing immediately after the action is instituted.



Chapter 5: Comptroller.



Section 91. Election; term; salary.



   The comptroller shall be elected by the electors of the city at the
same time and for the same terms as in this charter prescribed for the mayor.
A comptroller who resigns or is removed from office prior to completion of a
full term shall be deemed to have served a full term for purposes of section
1138 of the charter. The salary of the comptroller shall be two hundred nine
thousand fifty dollars a year.



(Am. L.L. 2016/019, 2/19/2016, retro. eff. 1/1/2016)



Section 92. Removal from office.



   The comptroller may be removed or suspended in the same manner as
provided in this charter with respect to the mayor.



Section 93. Powers and duties.



   a.   The comptroller from time to time in his or her discretion may,
and whenever required by law or requested by the mayor or the council, shall
advise the mayor and the council on the financial condition of the city or
any phase thereof and make such recommendations, comments and criticisms in
regard to the operations, fiscal policies and financial transactions of the
city as he or she may deem advisable in the public interest.



   b.   The comptroller shall have power to audit and investigate all
matters relating to or affecting the finances of the city, including without
limitation the performance of contracts and the receipt and expenditure of
city funds, and take the testimony under oath of such persons as the
comptroller may deem necessary. The comptroller shall conduct all audits of
entities under contract with the city as expeditiously as possible and in no
case shall initiate an audit later than two years after the expiration of a
contract term unless the comptroller determines in writing that: (1) such
audit is initiated in connection with litigation brought by or against the
city, (2) it was not practicable to initiate an audit within such two year
period, or (3) the initiation of the audit after the two year period is
appropriate in light of information discovered in an audit of another
contract of the same contractor. Such written determination shall be filed
with the mayor, council and public advocate.



   c.   The comptroller shall have power to audit all agencies, as
defined in subdivision two of section eleven hundred fifty, and all agencies,
the majority of whose members are appointed by city officials. The
comptroller shall be entitled to obtain access to agency records required by
law to be kept confidential, other than records which are protected by the
privileges for attorney-client communications, attorney work products, or
material prepared for litigation, upon a representation by the comptroller
that necessary and appropriate steps will be taken to protect the
confidentiality of such records. The comptroller shall establish a regular
auditing cycle to ensure that one or more of the programs or activities of
each city agency, or one or more aspects of each agency's operations, is
audited at least once every four years. The audits conducted by the
comptroller shall comply with generally accepted government auditing
standards. In accordance with such standards, and before any draft or final
audit or audit report, or portion thereof, may be made public, the
comptroller shall send a copy of the draft audit or audit report to the head
of the audited agency and provide the agency, in writing, with a reasonable
deadline for its review and response. The comptroller shall include copies of
any such agency response in any draft or final audit or audit report, or
portion thereof, which is made public. The comptroller shall send copies of
all final audits and audit reports to the council, the mayor, and the audit
committee.



   d.   The comptroller shall (1) audit financial transactions of the
city, including vouchers, warrants, and payrolls; (2) audit all official
accounts and the accrual and collection annually of all revenues and
receipts; and (3) audit the expenditure of city funds by any public or
private agency that receives such funds from the city.



   e.   The comptroller shall audit the operations and programs of city
agencies to determine whether funds are being expended or utilized
efficiently and economically and whether the desired goals, results or
benefits of agency programs are being achieved. The comptroller shall
investigate the processing of vouchers and the payment of bills by city
agencies and shall audit agency compliance with applicable procedures in
procuring goods, services and construction. The comptroller shall also
undertake studies, including cost benefit analyses, of: (i) purchases of
goods, services, and construction by agencies of government that use city
funds for such purposes and (ii) the adoption and use of new technology by
city agencies to promote their economy and efficiency, and periodically
report the findings and recommendations of such studies to the mayor, the
council and the public.



   f.   Not later than the first day of March of each year, the
comptroller shall deliver to the mayor and council a report describing all
major audits of city agencies conducted by the comptroller during the
previous fiscal year; the corrective actions recommended in such audits; the
corrective actions which have been implemented to the extent such information
is known to the comptroller on the basis of agency reports, comptroller
audits, or otherwise; and the comptroller's recommendations, if any, for
additional corrective actions.



   g.   The comptroller shall have the power and duty to audit all
vouchers before payment for availability of funds and prepare warrants. No
warrant shall be prepared by the comptroller unless sufficient appropriations
are available to cover the payments involved. No agency shall expend or
commit any funds otherwise than for the program and purposes for which the
funds have been appropriated and the comptroller shall conduct audits and
take such other action as is required to assure compliance with this
provision.



   h.   Except as provided in subdivision g, the agencies shall prepare
and audit vouchers before payment, prepare and audit payrolls, receive and
inspect goods and forward vouchers to the comptroller for payment. The
comptroller shall prescribe methods, with which all agencies shall comply,
for preparing and auditing vouchers before payment, preparing payrolls, and
recording, reporting and accounting in the several agencies and shall conduct
reviews to assure compliance. The comptroller may suspend or withdraw the
authority delegated to an agency pursuant to this subdivision (1) upon a
finding of abuse of such authority or on a determination that the agency
lacks adequate internal controls to exercise such authority properly and (2)
upon the approval of the audit committee after the agency has had an
opportunity to be heard on this matter.



   i.   The comptroller shall have the power to settle and adjust all
claims in favor of or against the city in such manner as shall be prescribed
by law and for that purpose may administer oaths, except that, with regard to
excise and non-property taxes, such power shall be vested in the commissioner
of finance. The comptroller shall not revise the terms of a contract or
agreement with the city after its execution. The city may include in
construction contracts or agreements for capital projects provisions that
authorize the comptroller to submit disputes arising under any such contract
or agreement to impartial arbitration.



   j.   The comptroller shall administer and manage the several sinking
funds of the city and all other trust funds held by the city, and provide for
the receipt and safekeeping of all moneys in such funds, except as provided
in paragraph b of subdivision three of section fifteen hundred four of this
charter, and in such administration the comptroller shall be deemed to be
acting in a fiduciary capacity.



   k.   The comptroller shall keep the accounts of the city and shall
at least once in each month render to each agency a summary statement of so
much thereof as relates to such agency.



   l.   Within four months after the close of each fiscal year, the
comptroller shall publish a statement for such year, including a full and
detailed statement of the revenues and expenditures of the city and the
surplus at the end of the fiscal year, including the average daily collected
deposits in bank accounts of the city, the investment performance of city
pension and other investment funds, an itemized statement of all taxes due
and uncollected at the close of the fiscal year, the reserve for estimated
uncollectible taxes, and the uncollected parking violation fines receivable,
an itemized statement of the condition of the sinking funds, and any other
assessable improvement funds, and of the tax appropriation and general fund
stabilization reserve fund as at the close of the fiscal year, the different
sources of city revenue, including itemization of receivables due from state
or federal sources by program and fiscal year, and the amount received from
each, the several appropriations made for the fiscal year, the objects for
which they were made and the amount of expenditures made under each, the
money borrowed on the credit of the city, the amount of each loan, the
authority under which it was made and the terms on which it was obtained, and
such other information in regard to such fiscal year as may be determined by
the comptroller or by law.



   m.   The comptroller shall establish for his or her office and for
all city agencies a uniform system of accounting and reporting based on
generally accepted accounting principles.



      1.   Such uniform system of accounts shall provide:



         (a)   control accounts in the office of the comptroller
that are consistent with budgeted units of appropriation and that are
adequate to record and control spending by the agencies and to prevent
agencies from exceeding appropriations;



         (b)   detailed accounts in the agencies for the purposes
of cost accounting, rate of expenditure information and other management
information data; and



         (c)   geographic accounts for the reporting of
expenditures for local service districts of agencies within community
districts and boroughs.



      2.   The comptroller shall prescribe procedures for accounting
and reporting for all agencies, and review agency accounts and systems to
assure compliance with this chapter and with the methods, standards and
procedures prescribed by the comptroller for the agencies.



   n.   The comptroller shall prescribe systems of accounting for city
agencies whose revenues arising out of the use of the facilities and services
supplied by such agencies constitute fifty per centum or more of the
appropriations provided for the operation of such agencies, which systems of
accounting shall conform so far as practicable to standard public utility
accounting practices. The comptroller shall publish in the comptroller's
annual report the financial statements for such city agencies.



   o.   Notwithstanding the provisions of any general, special or local
law or this charter or any contract heretofore or hereafter made or awarded
by the city of New York or by any agency, department or authority acting on
its behalf, the comptroller may, at his or her discretion, turn over the
physical custody and safekeeping of bonds, notes, obligations or other
evidences of indebtedness which have been or will be deposited with the
comptroller as collateral security as required by law or contract to a
custodian who may be (a) any bank or trust company incorporated in the state,
or (b) any national bank located in the state, or (c) any private banker duly
authorized by the superintendent of banks of this state to engage in business
here. The comptroller may enter into a contract with such custodian under
terms and conditions which the comptroller may require. Each depositor of
collateral security shall bear a proportionate share of the cost of such
custodial safekeeping which shall be paid to the city of New York.



   p.   No contract or agreement executed pursuant to this charter or
other law shall be implemented until (1) a copy has been filed with the
comptroller and (2) the comptroller has registered it in accordance with
sections three hundred twenty-eight and three hundred seventy-five of the
charter.



   q.   The council shall periodically review the requirements
contained in the charter for studies and reports by the comptroller and may
by local law revise such requirements as it deems appropriate. At such times
as the mayor or the council shall request, the comptroller shall submit to
them such information as they may request. The comptroller, upon request,
shall assist the council in the conduct of any of its investigations or
studies of the fiscal or economic affairs of the city or of any agency. The
comptroller shall provide reports to the council upon request and shall
testify before the council or a committee thereof.



   r.   The comptroller shall make a complete transcript of each public
hearing conducted by the office available for public inspection free of
charge within sixty days after such hearing. The comptroller shall also
provide a copy of any requested pages of such transcript at a reasonable fee
to cover copying and, if relevant, mailing costs.



Section 94. Deputy comptrollers and other appointees.



   a.   The comptroller shall appoint and at pleasure remove a first,
and second deputy comptroller. The comptroller may appoint and at pleasure
remove a third deputy comptroller who shall be a person qualified to advise
and assist the comptroller in all matters relating to borrowings and the
investment of funds. Except as provided in subdivision b of this section,
each of the deputies and any officer or employee appointed by the comptroller
shall have such powers and duties as may be assigned such person by the
comptroller by instrument in writing filed with the city clerk. Provided
however that no more than five such additionally appointed officers or
employees shall serve simultaneously. The city clerk shall notify the council
of the filing or revocation of each such appointment.



   b.   Any deputy comptroller or any officer or employee appointed by
the comptroller may act in place of the comptroller on any board, body or
committee of which the comptroller is a member whenever the comptroller shall
so authorize in writing and such authorization is filed with such board, body
or committee and with the city clerk.



   c.   Any vacancy in the office of comptroller shall be filled by
popular election, in the manner set forth in this subdivision. In the event
of a vacancy in the office of comptroller until an interim or permanent
successor is first elected, or whenever by reason of sickness, absence from
the city or suspension from office, the comptroller shall be prevented from
attending to the duties of the office, or while the comptroller is acting as
mayor, the first deputy comptroller or in the case of his illness or absence
the second deputy comptroller or in the case of his or her illness or absence
the third deputy comptroller shall act as comptroller.



      1.   Within three days of the occurrence of a vacancy in the
office of the comptroller, the mayor shall proclaim the date for the election
or elections required by this subdivision, provide notice of such
proclamation to the city clerk and the board of elections and publish notice
thereof in the City Record. After the proclamation of the date for an
election to be held pursuant to paragraphs four or five of this subdivision,
the city clerk shall publish notice thereof not less than twice in each week
preceding the date of such election in newspapers distributed within the
city, and the board of elections shall mail notice of such election to all
registered voters within the city.



      2.   If a vacancy occurs during the first three years of the
term, a general election to fill the vacancy for the remainder of the
unexpired term shall be held in the year in which the vacancy occurs, unless
the vacancy occurs after the last day on which an occurring vacancy may be
filled at the general election in that same year with party nominations of
candidates for such election being made at a primary election, as provided in
section 6-116 of the election law. If such a vacancy occurs in any year after
such last day, it shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term at
the general election in the following year provided, however, that no general
election to fill a vacancy shall be held in the last year of the term, except
as provided in paragraph nine of this subdivision. Party nominations of
candidates for a general election to fill a vacancy for the remainder of the
unexpired term shall be made at a primary election, except as provided in
paragraph five of this subdivision.



      3.   If a special or general election to fill the vacancy on
an interim basis has not been previously held pursuant to paragraphs four,
six, seven and eight of this subdivision, the person elected to fill the
vacancy for the remainder of the unexpired term at a general election shall
take office immediately upon qualification and shall serve until the term
expires. If a special or general election to fill the vacancy on an interim
basis has been previously held, the person elected to fill the vacancy for
the remainder of the unexpired term at a general election shall take office
on January first of the year following such general election and shall serve
until the term expires.



      4.   If a vacancy occurs during the first three years of the
term and on or before the last day in the third year of the term on which an
occurring vacancy may be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term at a
general election with party nominations of candidates for such election being
made at a primary election, as provided in section 6-116 of the election law,
a special or general election to fill the vacancy on an interim basis shall
be held, unless the vacancy occurs less than ninety days before the next
primary election at which party nominations for a general election to fill
the vacancy may be made and on or before the last day on which an occurring
vacancy may be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term at the general
election in the same year in which the vacancy occurs with party nominations
of candidates for such election being made at a primary election, as provided
in section 6-116 of the election law.



      5.   If a vacancy occurs after the last day in the third year
of the term on which an occurring vacancy may be filled for the remainder of
the unexpired term at a general election in each year with party nominations
of candidates for such election being made at a primary election, as provided
in section 6-116 of the election law, but not less than ninety days before
the date of the primary election in the fourth year of such term, a special
or general election to fill such vacancy for the remainder of the unexpired
term shall be held.



      6.   Elections held pursuant to paragraph four or five of this
subdivision shall be scheduled in the following manner: a special election to
fill the vacancy shall be held on the first Tuesday at least forty-five days
after the occurrence of the vacancy, provided that the mayor, in the
proclamation required by paragraph one of this subdivision, may schedule such
election for another day no more than ten days after such Tuesday and not
less than forty days after such proclamation if the mayor determines that
such rescheduling is necessary to facilitate maximum voter participation;
except that



         (a)   if the vacancy occurs before September twentieth
in any year and the first Tuesday at least forty-five days after the
occurrence of the vacancy is less than ninety days before a regularly
scheduled general election or between a primary and a general election, the
vacancy shall be filled at such general election; and



         (b)   if the vacancy occurs before September twentieth
in any year and the first Tuesday at least forty-five days after the
occurrence of the vacancy is after a regularly scheduled general election,
the vacancy shall be filled at such general election; and



         (c)   if the vacancy occurs on or after September
twentieth in any year and the first Tuesday at least forty-five days after
the occurrence of the vacancy is after, but less than thirty days after, a
regularly scheduled general election, the vacancy shall be filled at a
special election to be held on the first Tuesday in December in such year.



      7.   All nominations for elections to fill vacancies held
pursuant to paragraphs four and five of this subdivision shall be by
independent nominating petition. A signature on an independent nominating
petition made earlier than the date of the proclamation required by paragraph
one of this subdivision shall not be counted.



      8.   A person elected to fill a vacancy in the office of the
comptroller at an election held pursuant to paragraph four of this
subdivision shall take office immediately upon qualification and serve until
December thirty-first of the year in which the vacancy is filled for the
remainder of the unexpired term pursuant to paragraph two of this
subdivision. A person elected to fill a vacancy in the office of the
comptroller at an election held pursuant to paragraph five of this
subdivision shall take office immediately upon qualification and serve until
the term expires.



      9.   If a vacancy occurs less than ninety days before the date
of the primary election in the last year of the term, the person elected at
the general election in such year for the next succeeding term shall take
office immediately upon qualification and fill the vacancy for the remainder
of the unexpired term.



Section 95. Annual audit.



   a.   The city, in accordance with subdivision b of this section and
section ninety-seven of this chapter, shall take such action as may be
necessary to enable an independent certified public accounting firm or
consortium of such firms to perform an annual audit in accordance with
generally accepted auditing standards and to furnish to the city, in
accordance with subdivision b of this section, the report on such audit
prepared by such firm or consortium of firms, which report shall include an
opinion as to whether the city's financial statements have been prepared in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles and shall state
whether the audit of such financial statements was made in accordance with
generally accepted auditing standards. The city shall make available for
inspection and copying all books, records, work papers and other data and
material as required by such auditors, and officers and employees of the city
shall be made available to, and shall cooperate with, such auditors so as to
permit such annual audit to be completed and the report issued within four
months after the close of the city's fiscal year.



   b.   The annual audit described in subdivision a of this section
shall be made by a firm or firms of certified public accountants, as set
forth in such subdivision, selected by the audit committee. Copies of the
annual audit shall be submitted to the mayor, the comptroller, the council
and the state comptroller and shall be published in the City Record. No audit
engagement contract pursuant to this section shall exceed four years.



Section 96. Actuarial audit.



   The comptroller, with the approval of the audit committee, biennially
shall select an independent actuary to review and comment upon the financial
soundness and probity of the actuarial assumptions employed by the city to
calculate contributions to the city pension funds. The report of the actuary
shall be published in the City Record. No actuary may be selected more than
twice consecutively.



Section 97. Audit Committee.



   a.   There shall be an audit committee which shall consist of the
mayor, the comptroller, the public advocate and four private members
appointed by the mayor, two of whom shall be appointed upon the
recommendation of the comptroller. The members of the committee shall elect a
private member as chair for an annual term commencing on the first day of
March.



   b.   The private members of the audit committee shall include (i)
two persons with expertise in finance, and (ii) two persons with expertise in
accounting. Two private members, one of whom shall have been recommended by
the comptroller, shall serve for two-year terms commencing on the first day
of March, nineteen hundred ninety; and two private members, one of whom shall
have been recommended by the comptroller, shall serve for two-year terms
commencing on the first day of March, nineteen hundred ninety-one. Private
members shall continue in office until their successors have been appointed
and qualified. Private members shall serve without salary but shall be
reimbursed for expenses actually and necessarily incurred in the performance
of official duties and shall also receive a per diem allowance when rendering
services to the committee.



   c.   The audit committee shall:



      (1)   approve or disapprove the comptroller's suspension or
withdrawal of authority delegated to an agency pursuant to subdivision h of
section ninety-three;



      (2)   select a firm or firms of certified public accountants
to perform the annual audit of the city's accounts required by section
ninety-five;



      (3)   assist in the determination of areas of inquiry for,
review the progress of, and evaluate the results of, the annual audit
required by section ninety-five;



      (4)   approve the selection of the independent actuary to
perform the actuarial audit required by section ninety-six; and



      (5)   perform such other functions as are agreed to by all of
the members.



Chapter 6: Expense Budget



Section 100. Format of expense budget departmental estimates, preliminary
expense budget, and executive expense budget.



   a.   The expense budget departmental estimates, the preliminary
expense budget, and the executive expense budget for each year shall consist
of proposed units of appropriation for personal service and proposed units of
appropriation for other than personal service for the ensuing fiscal year.



   b.   Each agency head, for the departmental estimates, and the
mayor, for the executive budget, shall submit (i) a statement of the impact
of the proposed units of appropriation on the level of services to be
provided during the ensuing fiscal year and (ii) a written response to each
of the expense budget priorities included in each community board's statement
of budget priorities submitted in accordance with section two hundred thirty
of this charter, including the disposition of each such priority and a
meaningful explanation of any disapprovals contained in such estimates or
budget.



   c.   Each proposed unit of appropriation shall represent the amount
requested for personal service or for other than personal service for a
particular program, purpose, activity or institution; provided, however, that
a single unit of appropriation for personal service or a single unit of
appropriation for other than personal service may represent the amount
requested for more than one particular program, purpose, activity or
institution if the council has adopted, on the recommendation of the mayor,
or if the council has adopted on its own initiative and the mayor has
approved, a resolution setting forth the names, and a statement of the
programmatic objectives, of each program, purpose, activity or institution to
be included in such a single unit of appropriation. Copies of such
resolutions must be included as an appendix to any preliminary budget,
executive budget, and adopted budget to which they apply. If, in accordance
with such a resolution, a proposed unit of appropriation for other than
personal service shall represent the total amount requested for other than
personal service for more than one proposed unit of appropriation for
personal service, the amount of such unit of appropriation for other than
personal service which is allocable to each unit of appropriation for
personal service shall be set forth for informational purposes at the end of
each such unit of appropriation for personal service. If, in accordance with
such a resolution, a proposed unit of appropriation for personal service
shall represent the total amount requested for personal service for more than
one proposed unit of appropriation for other than personal service, the
amount of such unit of appropriation for personal service which is allocable
to each unit of appropriation for other than personal service shall be set
forth for informational purposes at the end of each such unit of
appropriation for other than personal service.



   d.   Each proposed unit of appropriation contained in the
departmental estimates, the preliminary expense budget and the executive
expense budget shall be accompanied by a statement of the programmatic
objectives of the program, purpose, activity or institution involved.



   e.   Each proposed unit of appropriation contained in the
departmental estimates and the executive budget shall be supported by line
items showing how the total amount of such unit is determined.



   f.   The departmental estimates shall be in such form and contain
such further information as may be required by the mayor or by law and shall
be public records which shall at all reasonable times be open to public
inspection.



   g.   For each city agency that has local or borough service
districts within community districts and boroughs, the departmental estimates
and the executive budget, where practicable, shall contain a statement of
proposed direct expenditures in each such service district for each requested
unit of appropriation.



   h.   The departmental estimates and the executive expense budget
shall include a contract budget prepared in accordance with the provisions of
section one hundred four.



Section 101. Preliminary expense budget.



   The preliminary expense budget shall contain proposed expenditures and
a forecast of revenues for the ensuing fiscal year, including, for each tax
revenue source which represents five percent or more of the total forecast of
tax revenues, a detailed statement of the methodology and assumptions used to
determine the forecast of revenues estimated to be received from such source
in sufficient detail to facilitate official and public understanding of the
manner in which such forecasts are made, shall indicate proposed units of
appropriations for personal service and for other than personal service,
shall include a financial plan for the city for the four ensuing fiscal years
(of which the first year is the year for which such preliminary expense
budget is being prepared), consistent with section two hundred fifty-eight,
with the amounts estimated to be available for discretionary increases, as
defined in section one hundred two, in such years, shall include the
departmental estimates of agency expenditures for the ensuing fiscal year
pursuant to section one hundred together with proposed sources of revenue for
each unit of appropriation specified therein and shall present a plan to
ensure balance between the expense and revenue budgets during the ensuing
fiscal year.



Section 102. Expense budget borough allocations.



   a.   Definition. The term "discretionary increases" as used in this
section shall mean an amount equal to the total amount of general fund
expenditures of city funds and state and federal funds over which the city
has substantial discretion proposed to be made in the ensuing fiscal year for
all purposes other than debt service minus the sum of the following items as
certified by the mayor, including related fringe benefits:



      (1)   all such proposed expenditures which are necessary to
continue to operate current programs and provide current services at the
levels at which they were authorized to be operated or provided, pursuant to
the expense budget for the current year as adopted in accordance with section
two hundred fifty-four and two hundred fifty-five or at levels not exceeding
such levels;



      (2)   all proposed increases in such expenditures for current
programs or services which are projected to be necessary to accommodate
projected increases in the caseload of current programs or to accommodate a
portion of such projected increases;



      (3)   all proposed increases in such expenditures for current
programs or services which are projected to be necessary as a result of
federal, state or local laws or judicial decisions which require increases in
benefit levels, service levels, or similar matters;



      (4)   all proposed increases in such expenditures for new
programs or new services required by federal, state or local law to be
initiated during the ensuing fiscal year; and



      (5)   all proposed expenditures, in excess of the expenditures
specified in paragraph one of this subdivision, which are necessary to
continue to operate current programs and provide current services at the
levels at which they are currently authorized to be operated or provided
pursuant to the expense budget for the current year as modified in accordance
with section one hundred seven, excluding the portion of such excess which is
attributable to budget modifications adopted in accordance with such section
which were not necessary to (i) continue to operate programs and provide
services at the level at which they were authorized in the expense budget for
the current year as initially adopted, (ii) accommodate actual but
unanticipated caseload increases in such programs, or (iii) accommodate
actual but unanticipated increases in spending of the types referred to in
paragraphs three and four of this subdivision, and excluding that portion of
any expenditure increase which was financed by a decrease in any
appropriations originally included in the executive expense budget for the
current year to pay for a discretionary increase.



   b.   Borough allocation. Five percent of the total amount of the
discretionary increases which the mayor includes in the executive expense
budget for the ensuing fiscal year shall be allocated among the boroughs by a
formula based on factors related to population and need and shall be known as
the expense budget borough allocation. Such formula shall be established by
local law, but in any fiscal year for which no such local law is effective,
such expense budget borough allocation shall be allocated among the boroughs
on the basis of the average of (i) each borough's share of the total
population of the city, (ii) each borough's share of the total population of
the city below one hundred twenty-five percent of the poverty level, and
(iii) each borough's share of the total land area of the city. Such a borough
allocation shall be reduced by any amounts necessary, in excess of the
amounts available pursuant to section one hundred two-a, to pay for the
operating costs, as certified in accordance with the provisions of
subparagraph a of paragraph one of subdivision c of section two hundred
eleven, of capital project constructed with funds recommended for
appropriation by the borough president in accordance with the provisions of
section two hundred eleven.



   c.   Preliminary borough allocations; initial borough president
notification. Concomitantly with the submission of the preliminary expense
budget, the mayor shall inform each borough president of the portion of the
executive expense budget for the ensuing fiscal year and for the three
subsequent fiscal years that, pursuant to the formula required by subdivision
b of this section, would be allocated to each borough if the amount of the
discretionary increases for the ensuing fiscal year and for the three
subsequent years were the same as the amounts projected by the mayor, in
accordance with section one hundred one, to be available for such purposes in
such years. The amount of such portion shall be known as the preliminary
expense budget borough allocation.



   d.   Borough president proposals. Each borough president, during the
consultations required by section two hundred forty-four, shall submit to the
mayor, in such form as the mayor shall prescribe, proposed appropriations for
the expense budget not exceeding such borough's allocation of the expense
budget borough allocation as certified by the mayor to the borough presidents
during such consultations. The timing of such certification shall allow
sufficient time for such consultations and for meeting the deadlines
established by section two hundred forty-nine. The mayor shall include such
proposed appropriations without modification in the executive expense budget
in accordance with the provisions of subdivision two of section one hundred
three; provided, however, that the mayor may also include such comments and
recommendations relating to such proposed appropriations as the mayor may
deem proper.



Section 102-a. Capital budget borough allocation expense budget contingencies.



   An amount equal to nine tenths of one percent of the cost of capital
projects constructed with funds recommended for appropriation in accordance
with the provisions of section two hundred eleven, shall be available to
provide for the expense budget requirements of such capital projects.



Section 103. Contents of the executive expense budget.



   a.   There shall be included in the budget:



      1.   Units of appropriation, prepared according to section one
hundred, in such amounts and upon such terms and conditions as may be
determined by the mayor. Such appropriations shall include:



         (a)   The amounts required by law to be appropriated to
the several sinking funds as certified by the comptroller.



         (b)   The amount required to pay the interest and
principal of city obligations as certified by the comptroller.



         (c)   An amount, as certified by the comptroller, equal
to the average of all expenditures during each of the five preceding fiscal
years for the payment of the expense of the removal of snow and ice,
exclusive of salaries and wages of regular employees of the city except for
overtime work and for work on Sundays and holidays, and exclusive of the
purchase of equipment.



         (d)   The several amounts which are payable from sources
other than the real estate tax levy, provided however that amounts
appropriated pursuant to chapter nine of this charter which are allocable to
a particular program, purpose, activity or institution, shall be included for
informational purposes only.



         (e)   Such other amounts as may be required by law.



         (f)   Such amounts as shall be determined in the manner
provided in this chapter to be necessary to pay the expenses of conducting
the business of the city for the ensuing fiscal year and for other lawful
public purposes.



         (g)   A reserve for unanticipated contingencies.



      2.   The proposed appropriations submitted by the borough
presidents in accordance with section one hundred two.



      3.   An identification of the proposed appropriations, being
proposed, by agency and project type and, within project type, by personal
service and other than personal service, for the maintenance of all major
portions of the capital plant, as such terms are defined in subdivision a of
section eleven hundred ten-a.



      4.   The terms and conditions under which appropriations shall
be administered.



   b.   All such units of appropriation and other amounts shall be set
forth without deduction of revenues from any source except as otherwise
provided by law.



Section 104. Contract budget.



   a.   Each contract budget shall set forth by agency each major
category of contractual services and each multiple purpose category of
contractual services for which appropriations are being proposed.



   b.   Each agency head for the departmental estimates, the mayor for
the executive budget, and the council for the adopted budget by a resolution
adopted with the budget, shall certify that each major category of
contractual services is presented as such and that no multiple purpose
category contains a major category of contractual services.



   c.   For purposes of this section



      1.   the term "major category" shall mean:



         (a)   a programmatic category related to a major service
provided by the agency or a major responsibility of the agency regardless of
dollar amount; or



         (b)   a programmatic category related to a particular
state or federal requirement; or



         (c)   a subcategory of those categories set forth in
subparagraph a or b of this paragraph where the dollar amount constitutes a
major commitment of city funds; or



         (d)   a category established by the council as a major
category pursuant to subdivision f of this section; or



         (e)   a category certified by the mayor as a major
category.



      2.   the term "multiple purpose category" shall mean:



         (a)   groupings of contractual services for related
purposes, none of which individually constitute a major category, but which
together facilitate public understanding of contractual spending provided by
an agency; or



         (b)   a grouping of unrelated contractual services,
which individually do not constitute a major category, and which are not
appropriately grouped with other contractual spending of the agency.



      3.   the term "contractual services" shall mean technical,
consultant or personal services provided to the city through contracts.



   d.   Major categories. Each major category of contractual services
shall be accompanied by a detailed description of the programmatic objectives
of the category, the number of contracts estimated to be included in the
category and the proposed appropriations for that category.



   e.   Multiple purpose categories. All other contractual services
shall be aggregated in multiple purpose categories. Each multiple purpose
category shall be accompanied by the number of contracts estimated to be
included in the category and the supporting schedules identifying the
purposes and amounts involved in sufficient detail to allow the council to
certify that the category does not contain major categories of contractual
services.



   f.   Change of categories. The council may alter any category in the
contract budget submitted by the mayor, or change any terms and conditions of
it. The mayor shall provide sufficient information and technical assistance
to allow the council to certify each category as a major or multiple purpose
category. The mayor may disapprove any alteration by the council. The mayor's
disapproval may be overridden by a two-thirds vote of all of the members of
the council.



   g.   Adoption of contract budget. The council may increase,
decrease, add or omit any amount in the contract budget as submitted by the
mayor, or change any terms and conditions of the amount in that category. The
mayor may disapprove any increase or addition to the amounts in the
categories, or any change in any term and condition of the contract budget.
The mayor's disapproval may be overridden by a two-thirds vote of all of the
members of the council.



   h.   Modification of terms and conditions. All spending for
contractual services shall be in accordance with the terms and conditions of
the contract budget as adopted; provided, however, that during any fiscal
year the mayor shall notify the council of any proposed modification of such
a term or condition. Within thirty days of the first stated meeting of the
council following the receipt of such notice, the council may disapprove the
proposed notification.



Section 105. Appropriations for goods, services or construction.



   Appropriations for the procurement of goods or services or the
provision of services, utilities, or facilities by the department of citywide
administrative services for other agencies and institutions in accordance
with the authority of the department of citywide administrative services
under the provisions of this charter shall be made to the department of
citywide administrative services but shall be segregated under the name of
the agency or institution for which they are intended and shall be considered
and accounted for as appropriated for such agency or institution. Nothing
herein contained shall prevent the designation of part of such appropriations
as a general stores account or under other appropriate designation to enable
the department of citywide administrative services to maintain a stock in
anticipation of requirements or to provide services, utilities or facilities
for joint use by more than one agency or institution.



Section 106. Expense budget administration.



   a.   Except as otherwise provided by law, no unit of appropriation
shall be available for expenditure by any city agency until schedules fixing
positions and salaries and setting forth other expenses within the units of
appropriation are established pursuant to the adopted budget, the
administration of which is subject to the provisions of this chapter, the
civil service law, and other applicable law.



   b.   The mayor shall establish and may modify for each agency (1)
quarterly spending allotments for each unit of appropriation and (2)
aggregate position and salary limits for each unit of appropriation, which
shall be made available for public review upon adequate notice. No agency
shall expend any sum in excess of such quarterly spending allotments, or
exceed aggregate position and salary limits. The mayor may set aside
specified sums as necessary reserves which shall not be included in the
quarterly spending allotments until released by the mayor. Each agency shall
administer all monies appropriated or available for programs and purposes of
the agency in accordance with quarterly allotment plans proposed by the
agency and approved or modified by the mayor. Each such plan shall set forth
by units of appropriation for the quarter of the fiscal year during which it
is to remain in effect: (1) rates of expenditures for personal services and
other than personal services; (2) ceilings on the total number of uniformed,
civilian and pedagogical employees; and (3) the total amount of funds to be
spent or committed by the agency during such quarter.



   c.   The mayor shall keep informed, during the course of each fiscal
year, of the progress of expenditures and the receipt of revenues, and it
shall be the duty of all agencies, when requested by the mayor, to supply all
information needed for this purpose.



   d.   The mayor may assume direct responsibility for the
administration of the schedule required to be filed by the agency head
pursuant to subsection a of this section when in the mayor's judgment the
fiscal condition of the city so requires or when an agency (1) is expending
funds in excess of the quarterly spending allotments or (2) is otherwise not
complying with spending allotments or aggregate position and salary limits or
(3) is not maintaining adequate accounts pursuant to requirements of this
charter.



   e.   Whenever the mayor determines, pursuant to the provisions of
this charter or other relevant statutes, that the full amount of any
appropriation should not be available for expenditure during the fiscal year,
the mayor shall notify the council of such determination and the implications
and consequences of those impoundments for service levels and programmatic
goals affected. The mayor shall respond in writing to a request by the
council for an explanation of why an appropriation should not be expended.



   f.   1.   Within thirty days of the adoption of the executive
expense budget, the head of each agency responsible for one or more of the
services listed in paragraph four of this subdivision shall submit to each
borough president, a plan for the allocation within the borough of the
personnel and resources appropriated for each such service in the borough.



      2.   Within thirty days of receiving such a plan, the borough
president may propose a reallocation of the personnel and resources within
the borough. Such proposed reallocations shall be implemented by the agency,
unless the head of the agency objects, in writing, to the borough president.
If such an objection is submitted, the borough president may submit a revised
reallocation proposal to the agency head which shall be implemented by the
agency head provided that no such modification may increase or decrease the
personnel or resources allocated to any community district for such service
by more than five percent.



      3.   If, during the course of the fiscal year, however, a
material reallocation of personnel or resources within a borough is
anticipated by an agency head to be necessary for any of the services listed
in subdivision four, the agency head shall consult with the borough president
prior to the implementation of any such reallocation.



      4.   The services covered by this subdivision shall include
the following services and any additional services identified for this
purpose by the mayor: local parks services, street cleaning and refuse
collection, housing code enforcement, highway and street maintenance and
repair sewer maintenance and repair, and the maintenance of public buildings
by the department of citywide administrative services.



Section 107. Budget modification.



   a.   Subject to the quarterly spending allotments and aggregate
position and salary limits established pursuant to section one hundred six,
and to other applicable provisions of this charter, of the civil service law
and of other law, changes in schedules, within units of appropriation, may be
made by the head of each agency. Any such changes shall be reported to the
mayor and the comptroller before the effective date thereof, and shall be
made available for public inspection under reasonable terms and conditions.



   b.   The mayor during any fiscal year may transfer part or all of
any unit of appropriation to another unit of appropriation, except that when
any such transfer (1) shall be from one agency to another or (2) shall result
in any unit of appropriation having been increased or decreased by more than
five percent or fifty thousand dollars, whichever is greater, from the budget
as adopted for such unit of appropriation, the mayor shall notify the council
of the proposed action. Within thirty days after the first stated meeting of
the council following the receipt of such notice, the council may disapprove
the proposed action; provided, however, that the mayor may recommend such a
transfer if it is related to an appropriation included in the budget pursuant
to section one hundred two only with the concurrence of the relevant borough
president; and a borough president may make such a recommendation with regard
to such an appropriation if it is concurred in by the mayor and does not
include a reduction in an appropriation other than one included in the budget
pursuant to section one hundred two on the recommendation of such borough
president. Written notice of any transfer pursuant to this subdivision shall
be given to the comptroller and shall be published in the City Record as soon
as possible after such transfer.



   c.   The provisions of this section shall not be deemed to authorize
any transfer from appropriations required by law.



   d.   The council may during any fiscal year transfer part or all of
any unit of appropriation within the council appropriation to any other
council unit of appropriation for any of its programs or projects or for any
other purpose, solely by adoption of a council resolution. Each such transfer
shall be published in the City Record and written notice thereof shall be
given to the mayor and to the comptroller not less than ten days before the
effective date thereof.



   e.   The procedures and required approvals pursuant to sections two
hundred fifty-four, two hundred fifty-five, and two hundred fifty-six,
without regard to the dates specified therein, shall be followed in the case
of: (1) any proposed amendment to the budget respecting the creation of new
units of appropriation, or (2) the appropriation of new revenues from any
source except for revenues from federal, state or private sources in regard
to the use of which the city has no discretion; provided, however, that the
mayor shall give notice to the council of the receipt and proposed
utilization of any such revenues, or (3) the proposed use by the city of
previously unappropriated funds received from any source. Any request by the
mayor respecting an amendment to the budget that involves an increase in the
budget shall be accompanied by a statement of the source of current revenues
or other identifiable and currently available funds required for the payment
of such additional amounts.



Section 108. [Detailed quarterly accountings.]



   The council shall be required to publish quarterly accountings of its
actual and planned expenditures, in sufficient detail to indicate the
positions and their purposes which have been funded, as well as the
activities and categories of materials and supplies purchased.



Section 109. General fund.



   All revenues of the city, of every administration, department, board,
office and commission thereof, and of every borough, county and other
division of government within the city, from whatsoever source except taxes
on real estate, not required by law to be paid into any other fund or account
shall be paid into a fund to be termed the "general fund."



Section 110. Expenditure reports.



   Any public or private agency, authority, corporation, board or
commission which receives city funds and is not otherwise subject to the
requirements of section one hundred six of this chapter shall submit
quarterly reports of the expenditure of such funds to the mayor in such form
and detail as the mayor may prescribe.



Section 111. Self-dealing among members of the governing boards of charitable
institutions.



   a.   Any charitable institution which receives any payment from the
New York city charitable institutions budget shall pass and implement by-laws
which will:



      1.   Require disclosure to the agency responsible for the
administration of charitable institutions budget and approval by such agency
of the material terms of any contract or transaction, direct or indirect,
between an institution and any member of its governing board, any partnership
of which he or she is a member or any corporation in which he or she holds
ten per cent or more of the outstanding common stock.



      2.   Preclude any member of the governing board of any
institution from sharing, participating or benefiting, directly or
indirectly, in the proceeds from any contract or transaction entered into
between the institution and any third party unless such participation or
benefit has been approved in advance by the agency and the governing board of
the institution has approved the transaction by a two-thirds majority
excluding the vote of member to be benefited.



      3.   Require each member of its governing board to submit to
the agency each year a disclosure statement including such member's name,
home address, principal occupation and business interests from which such
member or such member's spouse or domestic partner received income equal to
or greater than ten per cent of their aggregate gross income during the
previous year.



   b.   At the discretion of the agency, any payment or any portion of
any payment may be withheld from any institution which has failed to pass and
implement such by-laws.



Chapter 7: Tax Appeals



Section 150. Office of administrative tax appeals.



   There shall be an office of administrative tax appeals, which shall
consist of the tax commission established by section one hundred fifty-three
of this charter and the tax appeals tribunal established by section one
hundred sixty-eight of this charter and shall provide staff and
administrative assistance to such commission and such tribunal. The office of
administrative tax appeals shall operate pursuant to a written agreement
between the president of the tax commission and the president of the tax
appeals tribunal, and shall be headed by a director appointed in accordance
with such agreement. Such director may be the president of the tax commission
or the president of the tax appeals tribunal or both. If there is no such
agreement, such office shall provide staff and administrative assistance to
such commission and such tribunal in accordance with the respective powers of
such presidents.



Section 153. Tax commission.



   a.   There shall be within the office of administrative tax appeals
a tax commission to consist of the president and six commissioners who shall
be appointed by the mayor for a term of six years, except the term of two
commissioners first appointed pursuant to this section shall be two years,
the term of the president and two additional commissioners shall be four
years and the term of the remaining two commissioners shall be six years.
Each commissioner shall have at least three years business experience in the
field of real estate or real estate law. At least one resident of each
borough shall be included among the commissioners.



   b.   The tax commission shall be charged with the duty of reviewing
and correcting all assessments of real property made pursuant to the
provisions of section fifteen hundred six.



Section 154. Administrative powers of commissioners.



   Any commissioner shall exercise such other powers and duties as the
president may from time to time assign to him.



Section 155. Annual report.



   a.   The tax commission shall issue an annual report to the city
council and the mayor not later than the first day of March in each year.
Such report shall include the following information compiled for the previous
calendar year:



      (1)   the number of applications for correction filed with the
tax commission;



      (2)   the total actual assessed valuation of all applications
for correction filed with the tax commission;



      (3)   the total number of hearings conducted on applications
for correction;



      (4)   the total number of applications for which a reduction
or remittance was offered by the commission and accepted;



      (5)   the total actual assessed valuation of the reductions
and remittances offered by the commission and accepted;



      (6)   the number of accepted offers of reduction in assessed
valuation that amounted to (i) less than $50,000, (ii) $50,000 to $249,999
and (iii) $250,000 or more; and



      (7)   any planned or implemented improvements or modifications
in the manner in which the tax commission operates, including, but not
limited to, hearing practices and procedures, record-keeping, fact-finding
and information-gathering procedures, supervision and staff productivity and
efficiency measures.



   b.   The foregoing information shall be classified, wherever
applicable, according to real property class designation.



Section 156. Right of entry.



   The president or any commissioner may enter upon real property and into
buildings and structures at all reasonable times to ascertain the character
of the property. Refusal by the owner or his agent to permit such entry shall
be triable by a judge of the criminal court and punishable by not more than
thirty days' imprisonment, or by a fine of not more than fifty dollars, or
both.



Section 163. Application for correction of assessment for taxation.



   a.   When used in this chapter:



      1.   "Class designation" shall mean the determination,
pursuant to section eighteen hundred two of the real property tax law, of
whether real property is included in class one, two, three or four.



      2.   "Excessive assessment" or an assessment which is
excessive shall mean and include:



         (a)   an entry on an assessment roll of the assessed
valuation or real property which exceeds the full value of real property; or



         (b)   an entry on an assessment roll of the taxable
assessed valuation of real property which is excessive because the real
property failed to receive all or a portion of a partial exemption to which
the property or owner thereof is entitled pursuant to the law authorizing the
partial exemption; or



         (c)   an entry on an assessment roll of an assessed
valuation for real property which is excessive because of a failure to comply
with the limitations on increases in assessed value set forth in section
eighteen hundred five of the real property tax law.



      3.   "Misclassification" or real property which is
misclassified shall mean and include:



         (a)   an entry on an assessment roll of an incorrect
class designation; or



         (b)   an entry on an assessment roll of a class
designation which results in an incorrect allocation of a parcel's assessed
valuation between two or more classes.



      4.   "Unequal assessment" or an assessment which is unequal
shall mean and include an entry on an assessment roll of the assessed
valuation of real property which is made at a higher proportionate valuation
than the assessed valuation of other real property in the same class on the
same roll by the same officer.



      5.   "Unlawful assessment" or an assessment which is unlawful
shall mean and include:



         (a)   an entry on the taxable portion of an assessment
roll of the assessed value of real property which, except for the provisions
of section four hundred ninety of the Real Property Tax Law, is wholly exempt
from taxation; or



         (b)   an entry on an assessment roll of the assessed
value of real property which is entirely outside the boundaries of the city
of New York; or



         (c)   an entry on an assessment roll of the assessed
value of real property which cannot be identified from the assessment roll
description or tax map land parcel number on the assessment roll; or



         (d)   an entry of the assessed value of real property on
an assessment roll which has been made by a person or body without authority
to make such entry.



   b.   During the time that the books of annual records of the
assessed valuation of real estate are open for public inspection, any person
or corporation claiming to be aggrieved by the assessed valuation of real
estate may apply for correction of such assessment. Such application shall be
duly verified by a person having personal knowledge of the facts stated
therein, provided that if the application is signed by someone other than the
person or an officer of the corporation claiming to be aggrieved, the
application must be accompanied by a duly executed power of attorney as
prescribed by the rules and regulations of the tax commission.



   c.   The grounds for review of an assessment shall be that the
assessment complained of is excessive, unequal, or unlawful, or that the real
property is misclassified.



   d.   The application with respect to an assessment shall be on a
form prescribed by the tax commission and shall contain a statement
specifying the respect in which the assessment is excessive, unequal, or
unlawful, or the respect in which the real property is misclassified, and the
reduction in assessed valuation or taxable assessed valuation or change in
class designation or allocation of assessed valuation sought.



   e.   Except in the case of a multiple or other dwelling which is
occupied or is to be occupied exclusively by fewer than seven families, all
income received or accrued and all expenses paid or incurred in the operation
of the property, to be reported as follows:



      (a)   if the applicant's books and records reflecting the
operation of the property are maintained on a calendar year basis, and the
applicant operated the property or has knowledge of the income and expenses
of said operation for a period of operation of at least two calendar years
preceding the first day of January of the year of the application, the income
and expense figures for the second calendar year preceding the date of the
application shall be filed with the application;



      (b)   if the applicant's books and records reflecting the
operation of the property are maintained on a calendar year basis, and the
applicant has operated the property or has knowledge of the income and
expenses of such operation for a period of less than two calendar years but
at least six months of the calendar year immediately preceding the date of
the application, the income and expense figures, related to the time during
which the applicant operated the property or had knowledge of the income and
expenses of the operation in the calendar year immediately preceding the date
of the application, shall be filed either with the application or prior to
the twenty-fifth day of March in the year of the application;



      (c)   if the applicant's books and records reflecting the
operation of the property are maintained on a fiscal year basis for federal
income tax purposes and such fiscal year ended at least six months prior to
the date of the application, and the applicant has operated the property for
at least one year and six months prior to the date of the application or has
knowledge of the income and expenses of the property for a period of at least
one year and six months prior to the date of the application, the income and
expense figures of the operation of the property for the last complete fiscal
year preceding the date of the application shall be filed with the
application;



      (d)   if the books and records reflecting the operation of the
property are maintained on a fiscal year basis for federal income tax
purposes and either such fiscal year ended less than six months prior to the
date of the application, or the applicant has not operated the property or
has no knowledge of the income and expenses of such operation for the last
entire fiscal year which ended at least six months prior to the date of the
application, income and expense figures shall be filed, either with the
application or prior to the twenty-fifth day of March in the year of the
application, reflecting the period of the applicant's operation or knowledge
of the operation of the property during the fiscal year preceding the date of
the application, provided such period encompassed at least six months and
further provided however, such fiscal year ends prior to the taxable status
date under review;



      (e)   if the applicant has not operated the property for at
least six months of the calendar year preceding the date of the application
and is without knowledge of the income and expenses of operation, it shall
state such facts under oath in lieu of filing an income and expense statement.



   f.   The filing of an application in the manner and form hereinabove
described shall be prerequisite to the review of a final determination of the
tax commission as provided in section one hundred sixty-six. Such
application, in the case of real property indicated on a tax map by a parcel
number, shall be filed in the office of the tax commission in the borough in
which such real property is situated and in the case of real property
indicated by an identification number, it shall be filed in the main office
of the tax commission. Employees of the commission assigned by the president
for the purpose of receiving such applications are thereby authorized to
administer oaths between the fifteenth day of January and the first day of
March.



Section 164. Procedure on application.



   a.   Between the fifteenth day of January and the twenty-fifth day
of May, the tax commission may itself or by a commissioner or assessor
thereunto authorized by the commission or any other person with
qualifications relevant to the review of real property tax assessments,
including real estate and real estate law, as determined by the commission
and consistent with state law, act upon applications, compel the attendance
of witnesses, administer oaths or affirmations and examine applicants and
other witnesses under oath. It shall make rules of practice for proceedings
before the tax commission, and such rules and regulations as may be
appropriate and expedient to the end that the taxpayers may have a hearing in
the borough in which they reside or in which their property is located,
except that all applications with respect to property indicated on the tax
maps by identification numbers shall be heard by the tax commission sitting
as a body at its main office.



   b.   The tax commission shall determine the final assessed valuation
or taxable assessed valuation, or the actual assessment or transition
assessment, or the proper class designation of the real property of each
applicant. The final assessed valuation or taxable assessed valuation of real
property may be the same as or less than the original assessment or, if
determined to be unlawful, the same shall be ordered stricken from the roll
or where appropriate entered on the exempt portion of the roll. If it is
determined that the real property is misclassified, the correct class
designation or allocation of assessed valuation shall be entered on the roll.



Section 164-a. Procedure on application for correction of an assessment of
seven hundred fifty thousand dollars or more.



   a.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this charter or the
administrative code, the tax commission may itself or by a commissioner or
assessor authorized by the commission act upon applications for correction of
an assessment of real property assessed at seven hundred fifty thousand
dollars or more between the first day of February and the first day of
September. Any such application shall specify all income received or accrued
and all expenses paid or incurred in the operation of the property during the
calendar year preceding the date of application, or during the applicant's
last fiscal year preceding the date of the application if the applicant's
books and records are maintained on a fiscal year basis for federal income
tax purposes which ends six months or more prior to the date of application,
or during any part of such calendar or fiscal year in which the property was
operated by the applicant, except that where the applicant has not operated
the property and is without knowledge of the income and expenses of the
operation, it shall state such facts under oath in lieu thereof. In the event
that the statement of income and expenses is not filed as part of the
application, such statement, when duly verified, shall be filed prior to the
twenty-fifth day of March.



   b.   All other provisions of law shall apply to the review of
applications for correction of tentative assessed valuation of property
assessed for seven hundred fifty thousand dollars or more except insofar as
the dates contained therein are inconsistent with the dates set forth in this
section.



   c.   [Repealed.]



   d.   Whenever such a reduction is granted after a final completion
of the assessment roll any tax imposed upon the amount of such reduction
shall be refunded or credited as soon as practicable.



   e.   Any reduction shall be made public within sixty days after it
is rendered. A list of reductions in real property assessments shall be
published thereafter in the city record on or before the first of November.



Section 164-b. Procedure on application for correction of an assessment of
class one property.



   a.   When used in this section:



      1.   "Class designation" shall mean the determination,
pursuant to article eighteen of the real property tax law, of whether real
property is included in class one, two, three or four.



      2.   "Excessive assessment" or an assessment which is
excessive shall mean and include:



         (a)   an entry on an assessment roll of the assessed
valuation of real property which exceeds the full value of real property; or



         (b)   an entry on an assessment roll of the taxable
assessed valuation of real property which is excessive because the real
property failed to receive all or a portion of a partial exemption to which
the real property or owner thereof is entitled pursuant to the law
authorizing the partial exemption; or



         (c)   an entry on the assessment roll of an assessed
valuation for real property which is excessive because of a failure to comply
with the limitations on increases in assessed value set forth in section
eighteen hundred five of the real property tax law.



      3.   "Misclassification" or real property which is
misclassified shall mean and include:



         (a)   an entry on an assessment roll of an incorrect
class designation; or



         (b)   an entry on the assessment roll of a class
designation which results in an incorrect allocation of a parcel's assessed
valuation between two or more classes.



      4.   "Unequal assessment" or an assessment which is unequal
shall mean and include an entry on an assessment roll of the assessed
valuation of real property improved by a one, two or three family residence
which is made at either a higher proportion of full value than the assessed
valuation of other residential property on the same roll or at a higher
proportion of full value than the assessed valuation of all real property on
the same roll.



      5.   "Unlawful assessment" or an assessment which is unlawful
shall mean and include:



         (a)   an entry on the taxable portion of the assessment
roll of the assessed valuation of real property which, except for the
provisions of section four hundred ninety of the real property tax law, is
wholly exempt from taxation; or



         (b)   an entry on an assessment roll of the assessed
valuation of real property which is entirely outside the boundaries of the
city of New York; or



         (c)   an entry on an assessment roll of the assessed
valuation of real property which cannot be identified from the assessment
roll description or tax map land parcel number on the assessment roll; or



         (d)   an entry of the assessed valuation of real
property on an assessment roll which has been made by a person or body
without the authority to make such entry.



   b.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this charter or
administrative code, any party claiming to be aggrieved by the assessed
valuation of a parcel designated class one pursuant to the provisions of
article eighteen of the real property tax law may apply for correction of
such assessment from the fifteenth day of January until the fifteenth day of
March, including the filing of exemptions for senior citizens, and the office
of the real property assessment bureau of the department of finance in each
borough shall remain open for accepting such applications during normal
business hours and for at least three additional hours each week.



   c.   the grounds for review of an assessment shall be that the
assessment complained of is excessive, unequal, unlawful, or that the real
property is mis- classified.



   d.   The application for correction of assessment shall be on a form
prescribed by the tax commission and shall contain a statement specifying the
respect in which the assessment is excessive, unequal, or unlawful, or the
respect in which the real property is misclassified, and the reduction in
assessed valuation or taxable assessed valuation or change in class
designation or allocation of assessed valuation sought. Such application must
be made by the aggrieved party or by some person authorized in writing by the
aggrieved party or his agent to make such statement who has knowledge of the
facts stated therein. Such written authorization must be made a part of the
application and bear a date within one year of the date on which the
application is filed. In lieu of a verification the application shall contain
the following sentence: "I certify that all statements made on this
application, including the attached sheet(s) consisting of pages, are true
and correct to the best of my knowledge and belief and I understand that the
making of any willful false statement of material fact herein will subject me
to the provisions of the penal law relevant to the making and filing of false
statements."



   e.   The tax commission shall thereafter determine the final
assessed valuation or taxable assessed valuation, or the actual assessment or
transition assessment, or the proper class designation of the real property
of each applicant. When the applicant specifies that the assessment is
unequal, in addition to other evidence presented, the tax commission shall
consider the residential assessment ratio determined pursuant to section
seven hundred thirty-eight of the real property tax law. The final assessed
valuation or taxable assessed valuation of real property may be the same as
or less than the original assessment or, if determined to be unlawful, the
same shall be ordered stricken from the roll or where appropriate entered on
the exempt portion of the roll. If it is determined that the real property is
misclassified, the correct class designation or allocation of assessed
valuation shall be ordered entered on the roll.



   f.   All other provisions of law shall apply to the review of
applications for correction of tentative assessed valuation of class one
property except when inconsistent with any provision of this section.



Section 165. Final determination of the tax commission.



   The final determination of the tax commission upon any application for
the correction of an assessment shall be rendered not later than the
twenty-fifth day of May. Otherwise, the assessment objected to shall be
deemed to be the final determination of the tax commission.



Section 165-a. Notices of final determination on applications for
owner-occupied residential property.



   On or before the last day provided by law for the rendering of the
final determination of the tax commission pursuant to section one hundred
sixty-five of this charter the tax commission shall mail to each applicant
who has filed an application for the correction of the assessment of a one,
two or three family residential structure, except such property held in a
cooperative or condominium form of ownership, a notice of the tax
commission's determination of his or her assessment. Such notice shall also
contain the statement: "If you are dissatisfied with the determination of the
New York city tax commission and you are the owner of a one, two or three
family residential structure and reside at such residence, you may seek
judicial review of your assessment either under title one of article seven of
the real property tax law or under the small claims assessment review law
provided by title one-A of article seven of the real property tax law." Such
notice shall also state the last date to file petitions for judicial review
and the location where small claims assessment review petitions may be
obtained. Failure to mail any such notice or failure of the applicant to
receive the same shall not affect the validity of the assessment.



Section 166. Proceeding to review final determination of the tax commission.



   A proceeding to review or correct on the merits any final determination
of the tax commission may be had as provided by law, and if brought to review
a determination mentioned in section one hundred sixty-five must be commenced
before the twenty-fifth day of October following the time when the
determination sought to be reviewed or corrected was made.



Section 167. Exemptions for persons sixty-five years of age or over.
[Repealed]



Section 168. Tribunal for tax appeals.



   a.   An independent tax appeals tribunal is hereby established. Such
tribunal shall be within the office of administrative tax appeals established
under section one hundred fifty of this charter. The tribunal shall have
jurisdiction to hear and determine cases initiated by the filing of petitions
protesting notices issued by the commissioner of finance, which give a person
the right to a hearing, including but not limited to any notice of
determination of tax due, of a tax deficiency, of a denial of a refund or
credit application or of the refusal to grant, the suspension or the
revocation of a license issued pursuant to chapter thirteen of title eleven
of the administrative code, which notices relate to nonproperty taxes, excise
taxes and annual vault charges imposed by the city, except those taxes and
charges administered by the State of New York on behalf of the City of New
York. For purposes of the preceding sentence, if the commissioner of finance
fails to act with respect to a refund application before the expiration of
the time period after which the taxpayer may file a petition for refund with
the tribunal pursuant to subdivision (c) of section 11-529 or subdivision
three of section 11-680 of the administrative code, such failure shall be
deemed to be a notice of denial of a refund issued by the commissioner of
finance pursuant to such subdivision. The tribunal shall review petitions and
other documents submitted to it, hold hearings, and render decisions as
provided in this chapter. In rendering its decisions on claims asserted by
taxpayers or the commissioner of finance, the tribunal shall have the same
power and authority as the commissioner of finance to impose, modify or waive
any taxes within its jurisdiction, interest thereon, and any applicable civil
penalties. In appeals in which the rules of the commissioner of finance are
at issue, the tribunal shall have the power and authority to rule on the
legality of such rules.



   b.   The tribunal shall be composed of three commissioners, each of
whom shall be appointed by the mayor. The mayor shall designate one of the
three commissioners as president of the tribunal, who shall serve as
president during his or her term as commissioner. The president of the
tribunal, in addition to performing his or her duties as a commissioner,
shall be in charge of the administration and operation of the tribunal. Each
commissioner shall serve a term of six years, except the mayor shall specify
in the case of the first three commissioners appointed that (i) the term of
one of those commissioners shall expire on June thirtieth, nineteen hundred
and ninety-two, (ii) the term of another of those commissioners shall expire
on June thirtieth, nineteen hundred and ninety-four, and (iii) the term of
the commissioner designated president shall expire on June thirtieth,
nineteen hundred and ninety-six. The mayor may remove any commissioner from
the tribunal for neglect of duty, for inability to perform duties because of
mental or physical disability, for malfeasance or for any other just cause,
after providing such commissioner prior notice and an opportunity to be
heard. The mayor shall fill any vacancy in the tribunal occurring other than
by expiration of term in the same manner as for making original appointments,
except an appointment to fill a vacancy shall expire at the end of the term
of the commissioner whose departure created the vacancy. The number of
commissioners on the tribunal may be increased by local law.



   c.   No person shall be appointed as a commissioner unless that
person possesses substantial knowledge and competence in the area of taxation
and has been admitted to practice as an attorney in the State of New York for
at least ten years. Every commissioner, while in office, shall give his or
her whole time to the duties of the office, and shall not engage in the
practice of law or other occupation, profession or employment. Each
commissioner shall receive an annual salary in the same amount as is payable
to a judge of the civil court of the City of New York. A commissioner's
annual salary shall not be diminished during his or her term of office.



   d.   The president of the tribunal shall appoint administrative law
judges, subject to appropriations therefor, who shall be authorized to
conduct any hearing or motion procedure within the jurisdiction of the
tribunal, subject to en banc review by the tribunal. Each administrative law
judge shall be an attorney admitted to practice in the state of New York for
at least five years or is currently employed as a hearing officer in the
department of finance. Each administrative law judge shall be appointed
pursuant to the civil service law. The president may designate one of the
administrative law judges to be the chief administrative law judge, having
such powers as are prescribed under the rules of the tribunal. A
determination issued by an administrative law judge shall finally decide the
matters in controversy unless any party to the hearing takes exception by
timely requesting a review by the tribunal sitting en banc as provided for by
rules adopted under section one hundred sixty-nine of the charter.
Determinations issued by administrative law judges shall not be cited, shall
not be considered as precedent nor given any force or effect in any other
proceedings conducted by the tribunal or in any judicial proceedings
conducted in this state.



   e.   The president of the tribunal shall appoint presiding officers,
subject to appropriations therefor, who shall be authorized to conduct small
claims hearings under a procedural system to be established pursuant to
subdivision e of section one hundred sixty-nine of the charter. The
qualifications for the position of presiding officer shall be determined by
rules adopted pursuant to subdivision e of section one hundred sixty-nine of
the charter, and each presiding officer shall be appointed pursuant to the
civil service law.



   f.   The tribunal shall collect, compile and prepare for publication
statistics and other data with respect to its operations, and shall submit
annually to the mayor a report on such operations, including, but not limited
to, the number of proceedings initiated, the types of dispositions made and
the number of proceedings pending.



Section 169. Rules of tribunal.



   Pursuant to chapter forty-five of this charter, the tribunal shall
promulgate rules of procedure, which shall include, but not be limited to,
rules on the following matters:



      a.   The types of representatives, such as accountants and
enrolled agents enrolled to practice before the internal revenue service, who
may appear, in addition to lawyers, on behalf of a petitioner before the
tribunal;



      b.   The form and contents of the petition, answer, affidavits
and memoranda to be submitted to the tribunal, and reasonable time
limitations for serving and filing such papers;



      c.   A procedure for promptly hearing and determining any
matter concerning jeopardy assessments or predecision warrants based thereon;



      d.   A procedural system guaranteeing a hearing in compliance
with chapter forty-five of this charter. Such a system shall be designed to
assign each petition filed with the tribunal to an administrative law judge
who shall hear and determine all matters pertaining to questions of law or
fact. Such a system also shall be designed to require the tribunal to review
en banc at the request of any party the determination rendered by an
administrative law judge, provided, however, that if there is no such request
for a review within thirty days of the giving of notice of such determination
by the administrative law judge, such determination shall finally and
irrevocably decide all the issues in the proceeding before the administrative
law judge and shall be considered a final decision of the tribunal upon the
expiration of such thirty-day period, except that, notwithstanding any other
provision of law, such determination by the administrative law judge shall
not be subject to judicial review. Such a system shall provide that the
tribunal may, based upon the record of the hearing before the administrative
law judge, make its own findings of fact and conclusions of law and issue a
decision either affirming, reversing or modifying the determination of the
administrative law judge, or the tribunal may remand the case for additional
proceedings before the administrative law judge, as it may deem appropriate.
The tribunal in its discretion may grant oral argument. Such a system shall
provide that when the tribunal reviews a matter en banc it must have a
majority present and that not less than two votes shall be necessary to take
any action. Such a system also shall provide for a pre-hearing conference at
which settlement is encouraged; reasonable discovery; and the submission of
papers addressing both the factual and legal merits in each proceeding;



      e.   A procedural system to be followed in cases in which the
matter in controversy is ten thousand dollars or less, exclusive of interest
and penalties. Such a system shall be designed to provide a simplified and
informal procedure for such small claims proceedings. The option to proceed
with a small claims hearing shall be exercised by the petitioner. At any time
prior to the conclusion of such hearing, a petitioner may by written notice
to the tribunal discontinue such small claims hearing and request that the
matter be transferred to a hearing conducted before an administrative law
judge. Such transfer shall be effectuated by such written notice and such
discontinuance shall be without prejudice to any subsequent hearing before an
administrative law judge. The determination of the presiding officer
conducting the small claims hearing shall be conclusive upon all parties,
shall be considered a final decision of the tribunal and shall not be subject
to review by the tribunal sitting en banc or by any court of the state.
However, the tribunal may order a rehearing upon proof or allegation of
misconduct by the small claims presiding officer. Determinations issued by
presiding officers shall not be cited, shall not be considered as precedent
nor given any force or effect in any other proceedings conducted by the
tribunal or in any judicial proceedings conducted in this state; and



      f.   A method for notifying taxpayers and the commissioner of
finance of, and for publishing, the decisions of the tribunal.



Section 170. Commencing an appeal before the tribunal.



   a.   Any taxpayer who has been issued a notice referred to in
subdivision a of section one hundred sixty-eight of the charter by the
commissioner of finance may petition the tribunal for administrative review.
To commence a proceeding, such a taxpayer must, within ninety days after
being issued the notice at issue by the commissioner of finance or, if the
commissioner of finance has established a conciliation procedure pursuant to
section 11-124 of the administrative code and the taxpayer has requested a
conciliation conference in accordance therewith, within ninety days from the
mailing of the conciliation decision or the date of the commissioner's
confirmation of the discontinuance of the conciliation proceeding, both (1)
serve a petition upon the commissioner of finance and (2) file the petition
with the tribunal. Notwithstanding the time specified in the preceding
sentence for filing a petition, a petition for refund filed pursuant to
subdivision (c) of section 11-529 of the administrative code or subdivision
three of section 11-680 of such code may be filed within the time specified
in such subdivision (c) or such subdivision three. The tribunal shall not
extend the time limitations for commencing a proceeding for any petitioner
failing to comply with such time limitations. The petition shall contain a
plain and concise statement of the facts and law on which the proceeding is
based.



   b.   Within thirty days after service of the petition on the
commissioner of finance, or within such longer period as the tribunal may
prescribe by rule, the commissioner of finance shall serve and file an answer
responding to each of the allegations in the petition and setting forth all
affirmative defenses and requests for counter-relief.



   c.   The filing of a petition with the tribunal shall stay (1) the
collection of any taxes or annual vault charges and (2) the payment of any
refund of taxes or annual vault charges, together with interest and
penalties, which are the subject of the petition, provided, however, if the
commissioner of finance finds that the assessment or collection of a tax,
charge, penalty or interest will be jeopardized by delay, such assessment or
collection shall not be stayed.



   d.   Upon assignment of a petition filed with the tribunal to an
administrative law judge, such administrative law judge shall hear and
determine any issues of fact or law. Unless otherwise provided by law, the
party seeking relief as to each issue shall bear the burden of proof. Upon a
request to the tribunal for review of a determination of an administrative
law judge, the tribunal shall proceed in accordance with the rules adopted
pursuant to subdivision d of section one hundred sixty-nine of the charter.
The tribunal shall follow as precedent the prior precedential decisions of
the tribunal (but not of its small claims presiding officers), the New York
State Tax Appeals Tribunal or of any federal or New York state court or the
U.S. Supreme Court insofar as those decisions pertain to any substantive
legal issues currently before the tribunal.



   e.   The tribunal shall have power to subpoena and require the
attendance of witnesses and the production of books, papers and documents
pertinent to the proceedings which it is authorized to conduct, and to
examine them in relation to any matter which it has power to investigate and
to issue commissions for the examination of witnesses who are out of the
state or unable to attend proceedings conducted pursuant to the authority of
the tribunal or excused from attendance at such proceedings. The tribunal may
designate and authorize administrative law judges and other officers or
employees of the tribunal to exercise any of the powers or perform any of the
functions provided for in this subdivision. A subpoena issued under this
subdivision shall be regulated by the civil practice law and rules. Any
person who shall testify falsely in any proceeding conducted pursuant to the
authority of the tribunal shall be guilty of and punishable for perjury.



   f.   The tribunal shall have power to provide that an attorney for
any party at a hearing conducted before an administrative law judge may issue
a subpoena as provided in the civil practice law and rules.



Section 171. Decisions of the tribunal and judicial review.



   a.   (1)   The determinations of the administrative law judges
and the decisions of the tribunal sitting en banc shall be in writing. Each
determination or decision, with the exception of those rendered pursuant to
the small claims procedure, shall contain findings of fact and conclusions of
law. A final decision of the tribunal may (i) grant in whole or in part the
relief sought by the petitioner and/or the commissioner of finance, or (ii)
dismiss the petition or request for counter-relief either on the merits or
with leave to renew.



      (2)   An administrative law judge shall render a determination
after a hearing, within six months after submission of briefs subsequent to
completion of such a hearing or, if such briefs are not submitted, then
within six months after completion of such a hearing. Such six month period
may be extended by the administrative law judge, for good cause shown, to no
more than three additional months. If the administrative law judge fails to
render a determination within such six month period (or such period as
extended pursuant to this subdivision), the petitioner for such hearing or
the commissioner of finance, or both, may institute a proceeding under
article seventy-eight of the civil practice law and rules to compel the
issuance of such determination.



      (3)   A decision of the tribunal sitting en banc shall be
issued within six months from the date of the request to the tribunal for en
banc review of an administrative law judge's determination, except that where
oral argument is granted or written arguments are submitted such six month
period will commence to run on the date that such oral argument was concluded
or written argument received by the tribunal, whichever was later.



   b.   Except as otherwise provided in subdivisions d and e of section
one hundred sixty-nine of the charter, each decision of the tribunal, shall
finally and irrevocably decide all the issues raised in the proceedings
before it, unless the petitioner who commenced the proceeding seeks judicial
review of any such decision in the manner provided in article seventy-eight
of the civil practice law and rules within four months after the giving of
the notice of such decision.



   c.   A decision of the tribunal shall be deemed to have been
rendered on the postmarked date on the decision sent by certified mail,
return receipt requested, to the address most recently provided to the
tribunal by each of the parties to the proceeding.



   d.   The tribunal shall not participate in proceedings for judicial
review of its decisions. The record to be reviewed in such proceedings for
judicial review shall include but not be limited to the notice of the
commissioner of finance which was the subject of the petition filed with the
tribunal, the determination of the administrative law judge, the decision of
the tribunal, the stenographic transcript of the hearing before the
administrative law judge and any exhibit or document admitted into evidence
at any proceeding before the administrative law judge or the tribunal.



Section 172. Sanctions.



   a.   The failure of any party to appear for a conference or hearing
without having obtained an extension from all the opposing parties or the
tribunal at least forty-eight hours in advance of such conference or hearing
shall be grounds for the tribunal to enter a decision in favor of the
opposing party or parties.



   b.   The signing of any paper submitted to the tribunal constitutes
a certificate by the signer that the signer has read the paper, and that to
the best of the signer's knowledge, information and belief formed after
reasonable inquiry, the paper is well grounded in fact and is warranted by
existing law or a good faith argument for the extension, modification, or
reversal of existing law, and that the paper is not interposed for any
improper purpose, such as to harass or cause unnecessary delay or needless
increase in the cost of the proceedings. If a paper is signed in violation of
this section, the tribunal, upon motion or upon its own initiative, shall
impose upon the person who signed the paper, a represented party, or both, an
appropriate sanction, which may include an order to pay the other party or
parties such sanction. The amount of any sanction shall be related to the
amount of reasonable expenses, including a reasonable attorney's fee,
incurred by the other party or parties because of the serving or filing of
the paper.



Chapter 8: City Planning



Section 191. Department and director of city planning.



   a.   There shall be a department of city planning, the head of which
shall be the director of city planning. The director of city planning shall
be the chair and a member of the city planning commission and shall serve at
the pleasure of the mayor.



   b.   The director of city planning shall:



      1.   Advise and assist the mayor, the borough presidents and
the council in regard to the physical planning and public improvement aspects
of all matters related to the development of the city.



      2.   Provide staff assistance to the city planning commission
in all matters under its jurisdiction.



      3.   Be the custodian of the city map and record thereon all
changes legally authorized.



      4.   Conduct continuous studies and collect statistical and
other data to serve as the basis for planning recommendations.



      5.   Provide community boards with such staff assistance and
other professional and technical assistance as may be necessary to permit
such boards to perform their planning duties and responsibilities under this
chapter.



      6.   Assist the mayor in the preparation of strategic plans,
including the preparation of the report provided for in section sixteen
concerning the social, economic and environmental health of the city, the
strategic policy statement provided for in section seventeen and the ten-year
capital strategy provided for in section two hundred fifteen.



      7.   Appoint a deputy executive director for strategic
planning.



      8.   Make a complete transcript of the public meetings and
hearings of the commission available for public inspection free of charge
within sixty days after any such meeting or hearing. The director shall also
provide a copy of any requested pages of such transcript at a reasonable fee
to cover the costs of copying and, where relevant, mailing.



      9.   Indicate on the department’s website the name and
contact information of an employee who acts as a coordinator with the board
of standards and appeals.



      10.   Provide on the department’s website, a record of each
application for a variance or special permit to the board of standards and
appeals where the department or the city planning commission has submitted
testimony and a copy of such testimony in a searchable format.



      11.   Perform such other functions as are assigned to him or
her by the mayor or other provisions of law.



   c.   The department shall employ such planning experts, engineers,
architects and other officers and employees as may be required to perform its
duties, within the appropriation therefor.



(Am. L.L. 2017/101, 5/30/2017, eff. 8/28/2017)



Section 192. City planning commission.



   a.   There shall be a city planning commission to consist of the
chair and twelve other members. The mayor shall appoint the chair and six
other members of the commission, the public advocate shall appoint one
member, and each borough president shall appoint one member. Members shall be
chosen for their independence, integrity and civic commitment. Appointments
of all members, except for the chair, shall be subject to the advice and
consent of the council. For such appointments by officials other than the
mayor, the procedure for obtaining the advice and consent of the council
shall be the same as the procedure provided for in section thirty-one for
appointments by the mayor. Except as otherwise provided in section one
hundred ninety-one, no member shall hold any other city office. Members other
than the chair shall be appointed for a term of five years; provided,
however, that of the members other than the chair, one member appointed by
the mayor and one member appointed by a borough president shall serve for
terms to expire on the thirtieth day of June, nineteen hundred ninety-one;
one member appointed by the mayor and one member appointed by a borough
president shall serve for terms to expire on the thirtieth day of June,
nineteen hundred ninety-two; one member appointed by the mayor and one member
appointed by a borough president shall serve for terms to expire on the
thirtieth day of June, nineteen hundred ninety-three; one member appointed by
the mayor and one member appointed by a borough president shall serve for
terms to expire on the thirtieth day of June, nineteen hundred ninety-four;
and two members appointed by the mayor, the member appointed by the public
advocate and one member appointed by a borough president shall serve for
terms to expire on the thirtieth day of June, nineteen hundred ninety-five.
The borough presidents shall determine by lot the length of the term to be
served by the member first appointed by each borough president. The
appointing officials shall make their first appointments to the commission on
or before the first day of March, nineteen hundred ninety. The commission
members so appointed shall assume office on the first day of July, nineteen
hundred ninety. Members of the commission shall serve until their successors
have been confirmed. Any vacancy occurring other than by expiration of term
shall be filled by the official who appointed the member in the same manner
as the original appointment. A person so appointed shall serve for the
unexpired portion of the term of the member succeeded. Terms shall begin on
the next date after the expiration date of the preceding term.



   b.   Members, except for the chair, shall not be considered regular
employees of the city for purposes of chapter sixty-eight. The agency served
by the members of the commission shall for purposes of chapter sixty-eight be
deemed to be both the commission and the department of city planning. No
member, while serving as a member, shall appear directly or indirectly before
the department, the commission, or any other city agency for which the
conflicts of interest board shall, by rule, determine such appearance creates
a conflict of interest with the duties and responsibilities of the member. No
firm in which a member has an interest may appear directly or indirectly
before the department or commission. For purposes of this section, the terms
"agency," "appear," "firm," and "interest" shall be defined as provided in
chapter sixty-eight.



   c.   One of the members other than the chair shall be designated by
the mayor as vice-chair and shall serve as vice-chair at the pleasure of the
mayor. The vice-chair shall possess the powers and perform the duties of the
chair when the chair is absent or while a vacancy exists in the office of the
chair, and shall at such times serve as director of city planning.



   d.   The city planning commission shall be responsible for the
conduct of planning relating to the orderly growth, improvement and future
development of the city, including adequate and appropriate resources for the
housing, business, industry, transportation, distribution, recreation,
culture, comfort, convenience, health and welfare of its population.



   e.   The city planning commission shall oversee implementation of
laws that require environmental reviews of actions taken by the city. The
commission shall establish by rule procedures for environmental reviews of
proposed actions by the city where such reviews are required by law. Such
rules shall include procedures for (1) selection of the city agency or
agencies that will be responsible for determining whether an environmental
impact statement is required in connection with a proposed action and for
preparation and filing of any such statement required by law, (2)
participation by the city in environmental reviews involving agencies other
than city agencies and (3) coordination of environmental review procedures
with the land use review procedures set forth in this charter. The director
of city planning and the commissioner of the department of environmental
protection shall assign from the staffs of such departments an office of
environmental coordination, which shall provide assistance to all city
agencies in fulfilling their environmental review responsibilities.



   f.   Not later than the thirty-first day of December, nineteen
hundred ninety-two and every four years thereafter, the commission shall file
with the mayor, the council, the public advocate, the borough presidents, and
community boards, a zoning and planning report. The report shall include (1)
a statement of the planning policy of the commission, which policy shall take
into consideration, among other things, the ten-year capital strategy, the
four-year capital program, the report on the social, economic and
environmental health of the city issued pursuant to section sixteen, the
strategic policy statements provided for in section seventeen and plans
approved pursuant to section one hundred ninety-seven-a, (2) a summary of the
significant plans and studies completed or undertaken by the department of
city planning in the preceding four years, (3) an analysis of those portions
of the zoning resolution that merit reconsideration in light of the planning
policy of the commission and (4) proposals for implementing the planning
policy of the commission whether by amendment of the zoning resolution,
development of plans or otherwise.



Section 193. Removal of commission members.



   A member of the commission other than the chair may be removed by the
appointing official only upon proof of official misconduct, neglect of
official duties, conduct in any manner connected with his or her official
duties which tends to discredit his or her office, or mental or physical
inability to perform his or her office, or mental or physical inability to
perform his or her duties. Before removal, any such member shall receive a
copy of the charges and shall be entitled to a hearing on a record by the
office of administrative trials and hearings, which shall make final findings
of fact, recommend a decision and submit such findings and recommended
decision to the appointing official for final action.



Section 195. Acquisitions of office space.



   Acquisitions by the city of office space or existing buildings for
office use, whether by purchase, condemnation, exchange or lease, shall be
subject to the following review and approval procedure:



      a.   The agency proposing any such acquisition shall file with
the department of city planning a notice of intent to acquire. The department
of city planning shall send such notice to the community board in which the
proposed acquisition is located and to all borough presidents.



      b.   Within thirty days of the filing of such notice, the city
planning commission shall hold a public hearing on such acquisition and shall
approve or disapprove such acquisition. Notice of such hearing shall be
published in the City Record not less than ten days in advance of such
hearing.



      c.   In reviewing any such acquisition, the commission shall
apply the criteria for the location of city facilities provided for in
section two hundred and three.



      d.   Within the thirty days provided for commission action
pursuant to subdivision b of this section, the commission shall file any
approval of such an acquisition with the council. Within twenty days of such
filing, the council may by two-thirds vote disapprove such acquisition.



Section 196. Affected boards and borough presidents.



   For purposes of this chapter: the term "affected community board" shall
mean the community board for a community district in which land included in a
plan or an application pursuant to this chapter is located; the term
"affected borough president" shall mean the president of a borough in which
land included in such a plan or an application is located; and a borough
board shall be deemed "affected" if such a plan or application includes land
within two or more community districts within the borough represented by such
borough board.



Section 197-a. Plans.



   a.   Plans for the development, growth, and improvement of the city
and of its boroughs and community districts may be proposed by (1) the mayor,
(2) the city planning commission, (3) the department of city planning, (4) a
borough president with respect to land located within his or her borough, (5)
a borough board with respect to land located within its borough, or (6) a
community board with respect to land located within its community district. A
community board, borough board or borough president that proposes any such
plan shall submit the plan together with a written recommendation to the city
planning commission for determinations pursuant to subdivision b of this
section. Any such submission may be made by a community board, borough board
or borough president only after the board or borough president proposing such
a plan has held a public hearing on the plan.



   b.   The city planning commission shall adopt rules establishing
minimum standards for the form and content of plans pursuant to this section
within a reasonable time period after the first day of July, nineteen hundred
ninety. Upon receipt of a plan proposed pursuant to this section by a
community board, borough board or borough president, the city planning
commission shall, within a reasonable time period, determine whether such
plan satisfies the standards established in such rules and is consistent with
sound planning policy. If the commission makes such determinations with
respect to a plan submitted by a community board, it shall prepare or cause
to be prepared any environmental analysis of such plan required by law to
enable the city planning commission and the council to act on the plan
pursuant to subdivision d of this section. If the city planning commission
makes the determinations provided for in this subdivision with respect to a
plan, such plan shall be referred to the department of city planning for
circulation and review pursuant to subdivisions c and d of this section.



   c.   All plans proposed pursuant to this section shall be referred
to the department of city planning for circulation by the department to all
affected community boards, all affected borough boards and all affected
borough presidents for review and written recommendation, except that any
such plan need not be circulated to the agency or official that proposed such
plan. All affected community boards and borough boards to which such a plan
is referred shall hold a public hearing on any such plan, except that in the
case of a plan that includes an entire borough or land in more than one
borough, only one public hearing need be held in each affected borough. The
city planning commission shall establish by rule the procedures and schedule
for review of such plans, consistent with the provisions of this section. A
community board or borough board may review a plan which does not involve
land so located as to require its review if in its judgment the plan
significantly affects the welfare of the district or borough served by such
board. In such case, the plan and any written recommendations relative
thereto shall be made available to such board on request. Such board may hold
its own public hearing on such plan if it desires and may submit its own
written recommendations in regard thereto to the city planning commission.



   d.   Within a reasonable time period following review and
recommendation of a plan pursuant to subdivision c of this section, the city
planning commission shall (1) review such plan, (2) hold a public hearing on
such plan, and (3) by resolution approve, approve with modifications or
disapprove such plan. If the commission has approved a plan or approved a
plan with modifications, such plan shall be subject to review and action by
the council pursuant to section one hundred ninety-seven-d. The council may
by a two-thirds vote approve a plan which the city planning commission
disapproved or on which the commission has failed to act if the mayor so
requests. Upon the filing by the mayor of such a request with the commission
and the council, the commission shall within five days file with the council
a copy of its decision together with a copy of the plan. Copies of approved
plans shall be filed with the city clerk, the department of city planning,
the affected borough presidents, the affected borough boards and the affected
community boards.



Section 197-b. Notification of plans and proposals.



   a.   Advance notice of all preliminary and final plans of public
agencies and public benefit corporations or of private agencies, entities or
developers filed with the city that relate to the use, development or
improvement of land subject to city regulation shall be given to the affected
community board or boards and the office of the affected borough president,
provided that exceptions may be made in matters of no appreciable public
concern by agency rule.



   b.   Copies of (1) all requests for proposals and other
solicitations of proposals issued by or on behalf of the city, whether or not
issued by an agency, a local development corporation or other entity, and (2)
all letters of intent executed by or on behalf of the city, whether or not
executed by an agency, a local development corporation or other entity, that
relate to the private use or the disposition of city-owned land, shall be
conveyed to the community boards where such land is located and the office of
the borough president where such land is located promptly after issuance or
execution.



Section 197-c. Uniform land use review procedure.



   a.   Except as otherwise provided in this charter, applications by
any person or agency for changes, approvals, contracts, consents, permits or
authorization thereof, respecting the use, development or improvement of real
property subject to city regulation shall be reviewed pursuant to a uniform
review procedure in the following categories:



      (1)   Changes in the city map pursuant to section one hundred
ninety-eight and section one hundred ninety-nine;



      (2)   Maps of subdivisions or plattings of land into streets,
avenues or public places pursuant to section two hundred two;



      (3)   Designations of zoning districts under the zoning
resolution, including conversion from one land use to another land use,
pursuant to sections two hundred and two hundred one;



      (4)   Special permits within the jurisdiction of the city
planning commission under the zoning resolution, pursuant to sections two
hundred and two hundred one;



      (5)   Site selection for capital projects pursuant to section
two hundred eighteen;



      (6)   Revocable consents pursuant to section three hundred
sixty-four, requests for proposals and other solicitations for franchises
pursuant to section three hundred sixty-three, and major concessions as
defined pursuant to section three hundred seventy-four;



      (7)   Improvements in real property the costs of which are
payable other than by the city pursuant to section two hundred twenty;



      (8)   Housing and urban renewal plans and projects pursuant to
city, state and federal housing laws;



      (9)   Sanitary or waterfront land-fills pursuant to applicable
charter provisions or other provisions of law;



      (10)   Sale, lease (other than the lease of office space),
exchange, or other disposition of the real property of the city, including
the sale or lease of land under water pursuant to section sixteen hundred
two, chapter fifteen, and other applicable provisions of law;



      (11)   Acquisition by the city of real property (other than
the acquisition of office space for office use or a building for office use),
including acquisition by purchase, condemnation, exchange or lease and
including the acquisition of land under water pursuant to section sixteen
hundred two, chapter fifteen, and other applicable provisions of law; and



      (12)   Such other matters involving the use, development or
improvement of property as are proposed by the city planning commission and
enacted by the council pursuant to local law.



   b.   The following documents shall be filed with the department of
city planning: (1) applications under this section, (2) any amendments
thereto that are made prior to approval of such applications pursuant to this
chapter, (3) any written information submitted by an applicant for purposes
of determining whether an environmental impact statement will be required by
law, and (4) documents or records intended to define or substantially
redefine the overall scope of issues to be addressed in any draft
environmental impact statement required by law. The department of city
planning shall forward a copy of any materials it receives pursuant to this
subdivision (whether or not such materials have been certified as complete)
within five days to each affected borough president, community board or
borough board.



   c.   The department of city planning shall be responsible for
certifying that applications pursuant to subdivision a of this section are
complete and ready to proceed through the uniform land use review procedure
provided for in this section. Upon certification of an application, the
department shall give notice of such certification to the council. If an
application under this section has not been certified within six months after
filing, both the applicant and, if the land use proposed in an application is
consistent with the land use policy or strategic policy statement of the
affected borough president, the affected borough president shall have the
right at any time thereafter to appeal to the city planning commission for
certification. The commission shall promptly, but in any event within sixty
days of the filing of such an appeal, either certify the application or state
in writing what further information is necessary to complete the application.
If such an appeal is brought by an affected borough president, the
affirmative vote of five members of the commission shall be sufficient to
certify the application.



   d.   If a meeting involving a city agency and an applicant is
convened to define or substantially redefine the overall scope of issues to
be addressed in any draft environmental impact statement required by law for
an application subject to review under this section, each affected community
board and each affected borough president shall receive advance notice of
such meeting, and each shall have the right to send one representative to the
meeting.



   e.   Each affected community board shall, not later than sixty days
after receipt of an application that has been certified pursuant to
subdivision c of this section,



      (1)   notify the public of the application in a manner
specified by the city planning commission pursuant to subdivision i of this
section, and



      (2)   either (a) conduct a public hearing thereon and prepare
and submit a written recommendation directly to the city planning commission
and to the affected borough president or (b) where authorized by this
charter, submit a written waiver of the right to conduct a public hearing and
to submit such written recommendations to the commission and the affected
borough president.



   f.   A copy of a recommendation or waiver by a community board
pursuant to subdivision e of this section that involves land located within
two or more community districts in a borough shall also be filed with the
affected borough board within the same time period as specified in
subdivision e. Not later than thirty days after the filing of a
recommendation or waiver with the borough board by all affected community
boards, or, if any affected community board shall fail to act, thirty days
after the expiration of the time allowed for such community board to act, the
borough board may hold a public hearing on the application and any such
recommendations and submit a written recommendation or waiver thereof to the
city planning commission.



   g.   Not later than thirty days after the filing of a recommendation
or waiver with the borough president by all affected community boards, or, if
any affected community board shall fail to act, thirty days after the
expiration of the time allowed for such community board to act, the borough
president shall submit a written recommendation or waiver thereof to the city
planning commission.



   h.   Not later than sixty days after expiration of time allowed for
the filing of a recommendation or waiver with the city planning commission by
a borough president, the commission shall approve, approve with
modifications, or disapprove the application. Any such approval or approval
with modifications of the commission shall require the affirmative vote of at
least seven of the members, except that the affirmative vote of nine members
shall be required to approve or approve with modifications an application
pursuant to paragraph five, ten or eleven of subdivision a of this section
relating to a new city facility if the affected borough president recommends
against approval of such application pursuant to subdivision g of this
section and has proposed an alternative location in the same borough for such
new city facility pursuant to subdivision f or g of section two hundred four.
The commission shall conduct a public hearing on all applications that are
subject to review and approval by the commission pursuant to this section.
Prior to taking any action pursuant to this subdivision on a matter involving
the siting of a capital project, the sale, lease, exchange or other
disposition or acquisition of real property, a request for a proposal or
other solicitation for a franchise or a revocable consent, the city planning
commission may obtain a report from the office of management and budget or
the department of citywide administrative services, as appropriate. Any
action of the city planning commission which modifies or disapproves a
written recommendation of the community board, borough president or borough
board shall be accompanied by a written explanation of its reason for such
action.



   i.   The city planning commission shall establish rules providing
(1) guidelines, minimum standards, and procedural requirements for community
boards, borough presidents, borough boards and the commission in the exercise
of their duties and responsibilities pursuant to this section, (2) minimum
standards for certification of applications pursuant to subdivision c of this
section, and (3) specific time periods for review of applications pursuant to
this section prior to certification.



   j.   If a community board, borough president or borough board fails
or waives its right to act within the time limits for review pursuant to
subdivisions e, f and g of this section, the application shall be referred to
the next level of review. If the city planning commission fails to act on an
application within the time limit specified in subdivision h of this section,
the application shall be deemed to have been denied unless the application
(i) is pursuant to paragraph three or four of subdivision a of this section,
in which case the application may be forwarded to the council for review
pursuant to the provisions of subdivision b of section two hundred, if
applicable, or (ii) is pursuant to paragraph eight of subdivision a of this
section, in which case the application shall be referred to the council for
review and action as provided by state law.



   k.   Notice of any hearing on an application by the city planning
commission shall be published in the City Record at least ten days
immediately prior to the date of the hearing, and a copy of the notice shall
be mailed to all community boards or borough boards affected by the
application.



   l.   The commission shall establish by rule procedures for advance
posting of notices of commission hearings on applications. Such notices shall
be posted at the location of the land involved in such manner and with
respect to such types of applications as the commission deems appropriate.
Failure to post any such notice shall not affect or impair the validity of
any decision of the city planning commission, the council or other agency or
official pursuant to this chapter.



   m.   A community or borough board may review an application which is
subject to the uniform land use review procedure pursuant to this section but
does not involve land so located as to require reference to such board for
review, if in the board's judgment the application might significantly affect
the welfare of the community district or borough served by such board. In
such a case the application and the related materials submitted to the
affected board or boards by the city planning department shall be submitted
also to such board upon the request of such board, and such board may hold
its own public hearing thereon if it so desires and may submit its own
written recommendations in regard thereto to the city planning commission for
consideration at any time before the city planning commission takes action
thereon.



Section 197-d. Council Review.



   a.   The city planning commission shall file with the council and
with the affected borough president a copy of its decisions to approve or
approve with modifications (1) all matters described in subdivision a of
section one hundred ninety-seven-c, (2) plans pursuant to section one hundred
ninety-seven-a, and (3) changes in the text of the zoning resolution pursuant
to sections two hundred and two hundred one. Any such filing of a decision
pursuant to section one hundred ninety-seven-c shall be completed prior to
the expiration of the sixty-day period for action by the commission. Any such
filing with the council shall include copies of all written recommendations
of community boards, borough boards and borough presidents with respect to
the decision being filed.



   b.   The following decisions filed with the council pursuant to
subdivision a of this section, shall be subject to review and action by the
council:



      (1)   any decision of the city planning commission to approve
or approve with modifications a matter described in paragraph three or eight
of subdivision a of section one hundred ninety-seven-c, a disposition of
residential real property (as defined in this paragraph) pursuant to
paragraph ten of subdivision a of section one hundred ninety-seven-c (except
for dispositions to companies that have been organized exclusively to develop
housing projects for persons of low income), a plan pursuant to section one
hundred ninety-seven-a, or a change in the text of the zoning resolution
pursuant to sections two hundred or two hundred one. For purposes of this
section, residential real property shall mean real property improved by
structures, whether or not occupied, built for or converted to a use which is
primarily residential, but shall not include property subsequently converted
to non-residential use;



      (2)   any other decision of the city planning commission to
approve or approve with modifications a matter described in subdivision a of
section one hundred ninety-seven-c, if (i) both an affected community board
(after holding a public hearing) and the affected borough president, within
the time periods allotted for their reviews pursuant to section one hundred
ninety-seven-c, have recommended in writing against approval and (ii) the
affected borough president, within five days of receiving a copy of the
decision of the commission, files with the commission and the council a
written objection to the decision; and



      (3)   any other decision of the city planning commission to
approve or approve with modifications a matter described in subdivision a of
section one hundred ninety-seven-c, if within twenty days of the filing of
such decision pursuant to subdivision a of this section, the council resolves
by the majority vote of all the council members to review the decision of the
commission.



   c.   Within fifty days of the filing with the council pursuant to
subdivision a of this section of any decision of the city planning commission
which pursuant to subdivision b of this section is subject to review by the
council, the council shall hold a public hearing, after giving public notice
not less than five days in advance of such hearing, and the council, within
such fifty days, shall take final action on the decision. The affirmative
vote of a majority of all the council members shall be required to approve,
approve with modifications or disapprove such a decision. If, within the time
period provided for in this subdivision and, if applicable, in subdivision d
of this section, the council fails to act or fails to act by the required
vote on a decision of the city planning commission subject to council review
pursuant to subdivision b of this section, the council shall be deemed to
have approved the decision of the commission.



   d.   The council shall not approve with modifications a commission
decision if the commission has determined pursuant to this subdivision that
additional review of the modifications is required. Prior to approving a
decision of the commission with modifications, the council shall file the
text of any such proposed modifications with the commission. Within fifteen
days of such filing, the commission shall file with the council a written
statement indicating whether such proposed modifications are of such
significance that additional review of environmental issues or additional
review pursuant to section one hundred ninety-seven-c is required. If no
additional review is required, the commission may include in such statement
its advisory recommendation concerning the proposed modifications, together
with any proposed amendments to the proposed modifications. The council may
thereafter approve such proposed modifications, with or without the
amendments proposed by the commission. The time period for council action
shall be tolled during such fifteen-day period; provided, however, that
proposed modifications may be referred to the commission pursuant to this
subdivision only once with respect to each application or group of related
applications under review by the council.



   e.   All actions of the council pursuant to this section shall be
filed by the council with the mayor prior to the expiration of the time
period for council action under subdivisions c and, if applicable, d of this
section. Actions of the council pursuant to this section shall be final
unless the mayor within five days of receiving a filing with respect to such
an action of the council files with the council a written disapproval of the
action. Any mayoral disapproval under this subdivision shall be subject to
override by a two-thirds vote of all the council members within ten days of
such filing by the mayor.



   f.   The mayor shall have the right to file a written disapproval of
any approval deemed to have occurred pursuant to subdivision c of this
section as a result of a failure of the council to act or to act by the
required vote. Any such written disapproval must be filed within five days of
the expiration of the time period for action by the council under
subdivisions c and, if applicable, d of this section. Any mayoral disapproval
under this subdivision shall be subject to override by a two-thirds vote of
all the council members within ten days of such filing by the mayor.



   g.   If a decision of the commission approving an application is not
subject to council review pursuant to paragraph one of subdivision b of this
section or is not made subject to council review pursuant to paragraphs two
or three of subdivision b of this section, the mayor may nonetheless file
with the council a written objection to such decision of the commission
within five days of the expiration of time for the council to act under
paragraph three of subdivision b of this section. Any mayoral objection under
this subdivision shall be subject to override by a two-thirds vote of all the
council members within ten days of such filing by the mayor.



Section 198. City map.



   a.   The city map is hereby continued.



   b.   The director of city planning shall be the custodian of the
city map, and it shall be his or her duty to complete and maintain the same
and to register thereon all changes resulting from action authorized by law.



   c.   The city map shall be on file in the office of the department
of city planning, and certified copies thereof and of all changes thereto
shall be filed in the offices of the corporation counsel, of the city clerk
and of the borough president of the borough in which the land shown on the
map is located and in the office in which conveyances of real estate are
required to be recorded in the county in which the land shown on the map is
located.



Section 199. Projects and changes in city map.



   a.   No improvement or project affecting the city map and no
addition to or change in the city map shall be authorized otherwise than as
provided in this charter.



   b.   The review of any proposed addition to or change in the city
map initiated by or referred to the city planning commission shall be made
pursuant to section one hundred ninety-seven-c and section one hundred
ninety-seven-d.



Section 200. Zoning resolution.



   a.   Except as provided in subdivision b, any existing resolution or
regulation of the council, the board of estimate or of the city planning
commission to regulate and limit the height and bulk of buildings, to
regulate and determine the area of yards, courts and other open spaces, to
regulate density of population or to regulate and restrict the locations of
trades and industries and location of buildings designed for specific uses or
creating districts for any such purpose, including any such regulation which
provides that the board of standards and appeals may determine and vary the
application of such resolutions or regulations in harmony with their general
purpose and intent and in accordance with general or specific rules contained
in such regulations, may be amended, repealed or added to only in the
following manner:



      1.   The city planning commission may upon its own initiative
at any time or upon application as provided in section two hundred one, adopt
a resolution to amend the text of the zoning resolution subject to the
limitations provided by law. Before adopting any such resolution, the
commission shall notify any community board or borough board affected by the
resolution and shall afford persons interested an opportunity to be heard at
a time and place to be specified in a notice of hearing to be published in
the City Record for the ten days of publication of the City Record
immediately prior thereto setting forth in general terms the nature of the
proposed resolution and a statement of the place at which the entire
resolution may be examined.



      2.   Any resolution by the commission approving a change in
the text of the zoning resolution shall be subject to review and approval by
the council pursuant to section one hundred ninety-seven-d. Any resolution
for a zoning text change which the mayor shall have certified to the council
as necessary, and which has been disapproved by the commission, may be
adopted by the council by a two-thirds vote and, after notice to the parties
affected, a public hearing. The council shall act upon such resolution within
fifty days of the filing of the certification of the mayor with the council,
and such resolution shall become effective upon approval by the council.



      3.   In case a protest against such a resolution approved by
the city planning commission shall have been presented to the city clerk
within thirty days from the date of the filing of such resolution with the
council, duly signed and acknowledged by the owners of twenty per centum or
more of the area of:



         (1)   the land included in changes proposed in such
proposed resolution, or



         (2)   the land immediately adjacent extending one
hundred feet therefrom, or



         (3)   the land, if any, directly opposite thereto
extending one hundred feet from the street frontage of such opposite land,
such resolution shall not be effective after the filing of such protest
unless approved by the council by a three-fourths* vote within one hundred
eighty days after the filing of said resolution with the city clerk. The
effective date of such resolution, if so approved, shall be the date of such
approval. A protest duly filed as herein provided may be withdrawn at any
time within sixty days from the date of the filing of such resolution.



   b.   Designations of zoning districts under the zoning resolution
and the issuance of special permits which under the terms of the zoning
resolution are within the jurisdiction of the city planning commission shall
be subject to review and approval pursuant to the procedures provided in
section one hundred ninety-seven-c and section one hundred ninety-seven-d,
except that whenever the city planning commission has not recommended
approval of a proposed change in the designation of a zoning district or the
issuance of a special permit under the zoning resolution or has failed to act
on such a matter within the time specified in section one hundred
ninety-seven-c, the council by a two-thirds vote may approve such change or
the issuance of such permit only if the mayor shall have certified to the
council that such change or issuance is necessary. The council shall act upon
such designation or permit within fifty days of the filing of the
certification of the mayor with the council.



Section 201. Applications for zoning changes and special permits.



   a.   Applications for changes in the zoning resolution may be filed
by any taxpayer, community board, borough board, borough president, by the
mayor or by the land use committee of the council if two-thirds of the
members of the committee shall have voted to approve such filing with the
city planning commission. All such applications involving changes in the
designation of zoning districts under the zoning resolution shall be subject
to review and approval pursuant to section one hundred ninety-seven-c, and
one hundred ninety-seven-d. For applications involving other changes in
zoning resolutions and regulations, the commission prior to taking action
upon any such application shall refer it to the affected community boards or
borough boards for a public hearing and recommendation.



   b.   Applications for special permits within the jurisdiction of the
city planning commission under the zoning resolution may be filed by any
person or agency. All such applications for the issuance of special permits
shall be subject to review and approval pursuant to section one hundred
ninety-seven-c and section one hundred ninety-seven-d.



Section 202. Platting of land and dedication of streets and public places.



   a.   No map of a subdivision or platting of land into streets,
avenues or public places and blocks within the limits of the city shall be
received for filing in the office in which instruments affecting real
property are required to be recorded in the county in which the land is
situated, unless such map shall have been reviewed and approved pursuant to
section one hundred ninety-seven-c and section one hundred ninety-seven-d. If
such map is disapproved, the chair of the city planning commission shall
certify such fact in writing upon such map, and such map shall be received
only for record without such approval.



   b.   No street, avenue, highway or public place, the layout of which
has not been approved as provided in this section, shall be deemed to have
been accepted by the city as a street, avenue, highway or public place,
unless such street, avenue, highway or public place shall lie within the
lines of a street, avenue, highway or public place upon the city map.



Section 203. Criteria for location of city facilities.



   a.   Not later than the first day of July, nineteen hundred ninety,
the mayor, after consulting with each of the borough presidents, shall file
with the city planning commission proposed rules establishing criteria for
(1) the location of new city facilities and (2) the significant expansion,
closing or significant reduction in size or capacity for service delivery of
existing facilities. The criteria shall be designed to further the fair
distribution among communities of the burdens and benefits associated with
city facilities, consistent with community needs for services and efficient
and cost effective delivery of services and with due regard for the social
and economic impacts of such facilities upon the areas surrounding the sites.
Not later than thirty days after the filing of such proposed rules, the city
planning commission shall publish a notice of proposed rule making under
section one thousand forty-three with regard to such rules, as proposed by
the mayor or as proposed to be modified by the commission. Promptly
thereafter, the commission shall approve or approve with modifications the
rules and shall file the rules as approved with the council.



   b.   At any time after the adoption of such criteria, the mayor,
after consulting with the borough presidents, may submit to the city planning
commission proposed amendments to the rules. Not later than thirty days after
the filing of such proposed amendments, the city planning commission shall
publish a notice of proposed rule making under section one thousand
forty-three with regard to such amendments, as proposed by the mayor or as
proposed to be modified by the commission. Promptly thereafter, the
commission shall approve, approve with modifications or determine not to
approve the amendments and shall file any approved amended rules with the
council.



   c.   For purposes of this chapter, "city facility" shall mean a
facility used or occupied or to be used or occupied to meet city needs that
is located on real property owned or leased by the city or is operated by the
city or pursuant to a written agreement on behalf of the city.



Section 204. Citywide statement of needs.



   a.   Each year not later than the fifteenth day of November, the
mayor shall submit to the council, borough presidents, borough boards and
community boards a citywide statement of needs concerning city facilities
prepared in accordance with the criteria established pursuant to section two
hundred three. Copies of the statement shall also be made available to the
public in the main branch of the public library in each borough. The
statement shall identify by agency and program: (1) all new city facilities
and all significant expansions of city facilities for which the mayor or an
agency intends to make or propose an expenditure or to select or propose a
site during the ensuing two fiscal years and (2) all city facilities which
the city plans to close or to reduce significantly in size or in capacity for
service delivery during the ensuing two fiscal years.



   b.   With respect to the city facilities referred to in clause one
of subdivision a of this section, the statement of needs shall describe for
each proposed new city facility or significant expansion: (1) the public
purpose to be served thereby, (2) the size and nature of the facility, (3)
the proposed location by borough and, if practicable, by community district
or group of community districts, and (4) the specific criteria to be used in
locating the new facility or expansion.



   c.   With respect to the city facilities referred to in clause two
of subdivision a of this section, the statement of needs shall describe with
respect to each such city facility: (1) the reasons for such proposed closing
or reduction, (2) the location, and (3) the specific criteria for selecting
the city facility for closure or for reduction in size or capacity for
service delivery.



   d.   The statement of needs shall be accompanied by a map together
with explanatory text, indicating (1) the location and current use of all
city-owned real property, (2) all final commitments relating to the
disposition or future use of city-owned real property, including assignments
by the department of citywide administrative services pursuant to clause b of
subdivision three of section sixteen hundred two, and (3) to the extent such
information is available to the city, (i) the location of health and social
service facilities operated by the state of New York or the federal
government or pursuant to written agreement on behalf of the state or the
federal government; and (ii) the location of transportation or waste
management facilities operated by public entities or by private entities
pursuant to written agreements with public entities, or by other private
entities that provide comparable services. Information which can be presented
most effectively in text may be presented in this manner. In addition to
being transmitted with the statement of needs pursuant to subdivision a of
this section, such map shall be kept on file with the department of city
planning and shall be available for public inspection and copying. The map
shall be updated on at least an annual basis.



   e.   Preparation of the statement of needs.



      (1)   Annually on such date as the mayor shall direct, each
agency shall submit to the mayor a statement containing all the information
required to be included in the statement of needs for the ensuing two fiscal
years pursuant to subdivisions a, b and c of this section that relates to the
plans, jurisdiction and responsibility of such agency. Such statements shall
be known as the departmental statements of need for city facilities. In
preparing such departmental statements of needs, each agency shall review and
consider the district needs statements submitted by community boards pursuant
to paragraph ten of subdivision d of section twenty eight hundred and the
statements of budget priorities submitted by the community boards pursuant to
section two hundred thirty.



      (2)   The mayor, assisted by the department of city planning,
the department of design and construction and the department of citywide
administrative services, shall review such departmental statements of need
and use them to prepare the statement of needs. In preparing the statement of
needs, the mayor shall apply the criteria established pursuant to section two
hundred three.



   f.   Upon receipt of the statement of needs pursuant to subdivision
a of this section, each community board and borough president shall review
the statement of needs. Each community board shall make the statement of
needs available to the public and conduct a public hearing on the statement
of needs. Each community board and borough president shall have the right to
submit comments on the statement of needs to the department of city planning
within ninety days of receipt of the statement. Each borough president shall
have the right, within ninety days of receipt of the statement of needs, to
submit a written statement to the mayor proposing locations for any new city
facilities to be located in his or her borough pursuant to the statement of
needs. All such locations proposed by a borough president shall be located in
his or her borough and shall be certified by the borough president as being
consistent with the specific criteria for the location of city facilities
contained in the statement of needs and with the criteria established
pursuant to section two hundred three. Each city agency shall consider such
written statements in taking actions with respect to matters included in the
statement of needs.



   g.   Whenever an application involving a new city facility is
submitted to the department of city planning pursuant to paragraph five, ten
or eleven of subdivision a of section one hundred ninety-seven-c, the
applicant shall include as part of the application a statement of (1) how the
proposed action satisfies the criteria for the location of city facilities
established pursuant to section two hundred three, (2) whether the proposed
action is consistent with the most recent statement of needs, and (3) whether
the proposed action is consistent with any written statements or comments
submitted by borough presidents and community boards in response to the
statement of needs. If the proposed action is not consistent with the
criteria for location of city facilities, the statement of needs, or any such
written statements or comments submitted in response to the statement of
needs, the agency shall include as part of its application a statement of the
reasons for any such inconsistencies. If the proposed new facility is not
referred to in the statement of needs, the applicant shall submit to the
affected borough president a description of the public purpose to be served
by the city facility, its proposed location, the appropriation (if any) that
the agency intends to use in connection with the facility, the size and
nature of the facility and the specific criteria for the location of the
facility. The affected borough president shall have the right, within thirty
days of the submission of such description, to propose an alternative
location in his or her borough for the proposed city facility, provided that
the borough president shall certify that the alternative location satisfies
the criteria for location of city facilities under section two hundred three
and the specific criteria for locating the facility in the statement of
needs. The application for the proposed site selection, disposition or
acquisition shall not be certified and shall not be reviewed pursuant to
section one hundred ninety-seven-c until at least thirty days after the
submission of such information to the affected borough president. A borough
president may elect to waive the right to such thirty-day review period.



   h.   The mayor's management report, prepared pursuant to section
twelve, shall include a review of the implementation of the statement of
needs. Such review shall consist of (1) a list of the proposed actions in the
statement of needs that have been implemented and of those proposed actions
that have not been implemented and (2) a description of the proposed actions
in the statement of needs which have been implemented in a manner
significantly different from what was proposed in the statement of needs and
the reasons therefor.



   i.*   The map and explanatory text accompanying the statement of
needs shall include an appendix with respect to city waterfront property,
which shall consist of a list indicating for each such property its borough
and map location; street address; tax block and lot; applicable zoning
district; approximate area in square feet; number of structures, if any;
current user and use; and such other information as the departments of city
planning and citywide administrative services deem appropriate. For purposes
of this subdivision, the term "city waterfront property" shall mean property
owned or leased by the city, which is seaward of the first upland mapped and
improved street, provided that it shall also include areas upland of such
street which would be contiguous with the property but for such intervening
street where such areas are in the same use.



* Editor's note: expired December 31, 2008.



Section 205. Comprehensive waterfront plan.



   Not later than the thirty-first day of December, two thousand and ten
and not less than every ten years thereafter, the department of city planning
shall file with the mayor, the council, the public advocate, the borough
presidents, and the community boards, a comprehensive waterfront plan. Such
plan shall be drafted in consultation with the appropriate city, state, and
federal agencies and regulatory bodies, and with input from the public, and
shall include (1) an assessment of waterfront resources for the natural
waterfront, the public waterfront, the working waterfront and the developing
waterfront, (2) a statement of the planning policy of the department of city
planning, which policy shall take into consideration, among other things, the
ten year capital strategy, the assessment of waterfront resources included
pursuant to (1) above, the four year capital plan, the strategic policy
statements provided for in section seventeen and plans approved pursuant to
section one hundred ninety-seven-a and (3) proposals for implementing the
planning policy of the department whether by amendment of the zoning
resolution, development of plans or otherwise.



Section 206. Tracking of commitments.



   a.   For the purposes of this section:



      Block. The term "block" has the meaning given to that term in
section 12-10 of the zoning resolution.



   b.   Such agency as the mayor shall designate shall establish and
maintain a publicly accessible online searchable list of all commitments
described in this section that relate to an application that:



      (1)   the city planning commission has approved or approved
with modifications for a matter described in paragraph one, three, four,
five, six, eight, ten, or eleven of subdivision a of section one hundred
ninety-seven-c or a change in the text of the zoning resolution pursuant to
section two hundred or two hundred one;



      (2)   the commission decision has been approved or approved
with modifications by the council pursuant to section one hundred
ninety-seven-d and is not subject to further action pursuant to subdivision e
or f of such section; and



      (3)   involves at least four adjacent blocks of real property.



   c.   Such list shall include all commitments made by letter by the
mayor or a representative designated by the mayor to the council or a council
member that relate to an application described in subdivision b of this
section on which the city or a not-for-profit corporation of which a majority
of its members are appointed by the mayor is either the applicant or
co-applicant.



   d.   Such list shall include any commitment made by letter by the
mayor or a representative designated by the mayor to the council or a council
member for which a funding amount of one million dollars or more is set forth
in the letter establishing such commitment in relation to an application
described in subdivision b of this section on which neither the city nor a
not-for-profit corporation of which a majority of its members are appointed
by the mayor is either the applicant or co-applicant.



   e.   Within thirty days of final council approval of a commission
decision described in this section, the designated agency shall submit to the
council and record on such list the commitments described in this section,
including a description of each commitment, the target commencement and
completion dates, the application number, the agency or agencies responsible
for implementation of such commitment, and any funding amount set forth in
the letter establishing the commitment. The designated agency may include
other information that it deems relevant.



   f.   Beginning June 30, 2017, and annually thereafter, the
designated agency shall report to the mayor and the speaker of the council
information relating to commitments that have been recorded pursuant to this
section, including any changes to information described in subdivision e that
indicate progress toward the fulfillment of each such commitment and whether
the commitment has been completed within the preceding year.



(L.L. 2016/175, 12/22/2016, eff. 3/22/2017)



Chapter 9: Capital Projects and Budget



Section 210. Definitions.



   As used in this charter:



   1.   The term "capital project" shall mean:



      (a)   A project which provides for the construction,
reconstruction, acquisition or installation of a physical public betterment
or improvement which would be classified as a capital asset under generally
accepted accounting principles for municipalities or any preliminary studies
and surveys relative thereto or any underwriting or other costs incurred in
connection with the financing thereof.



      (b)   The acquisition of property of a permanent nature
including wharf property.



      (c)   The acquisition of any furnishings, machinery, apparatus
or equipment for any public betterment or improvement when such betterment or
improvement is first constructed or acquired.



      (d)   Any public betterment involving either a physical
improvement or the acquisition of real property for a physical improvement
consisting in, including or affecting:



         (1)   Streets and parks;



         (2)   Bridges and tunnels;



         (3)   Receiving basins, inlets and sewers, including
intercepting sewers, plants or structures for the treatment, disposal or
filtration of sewage, including grit chambers, sewer tunnels and all
necessary accessories thereof;



         (4)   The fencing of vacant lots and the filling of
sunken lots.



      (e)   Any other project allowed to be financed by the local
finance law, with the approval of the mayor and the comptroller.



      (f)   Any combination of the above.



   2.   The term "pending" shall mean not yet completed.



   3.   The term "standards" for each category of capital projects to
which they apply shall include: maximum gross and net areas allowed; types of
programs which may be operated in the facility; performance requirements for
environmental systems; allowable materials and finishes; maximum areas
allowed for different functions and activities; approximate cost limits per
square foot of construction; and such other items designated by the mayor or
by resolution of the council.



   4.   The term "scope of project" or "proposed scope of project"
shall mean a description of a capital project included in the capital budget
that contains specific guidelines for the design and implementation of such
project consistent with the standards for the appropriate category of capital
projects and includes each of the following items of information which are
relevant to the capital project involved:



      (a)   Purposes and public to be served;



      (b)   Programs to be conducted in the facility;



      (c)   Gross and net amounts of space and bulk for any building
or structure and for areas for different functions and activities;



      (d)   Identification of required architectural, engineering or
other consultants and estimated fees for such consultants;



      (e)   Estimated completion dates for scope, design and
construction;



      (f)   Total estimated project costs, including costs for site
acquisition, preparation and tenant relocation, design, construction and
equipment;



      (g)   Estimated expenditures for the project for each fiscal
year until its completion;



      (h)   Estimated annual costs to operate programs within the
facility when fully staffed and to maintain the facility; and,



      (i)   Such other information as shall be required by the mayor
or by resolution of the council.



   5.   The term "cost" shall include the contract liabilities and
expenditure incurred for work in carrying out the physical improvement and
interest thereon, and the compensation to be made to the owner of any real
property acquired for the improvement as determined by a court or by
agreement, and interest thereon.



   6.   The term "expenses" shall mean any expenses incurred in
relation to an assessable improvement exclusive of cost and of damages
assessed by the board of assessors.



   7.   The term "street," as used in this chapter, shall include
street, avenue, road, alley, lane, highway, boulevard, concourse, parkway,
driveway, culvert, sidewalk, crosswalk, boardwalk, and viaduct, and every
class of public road, square and place, except marginal streets.



   8.   The term "real property" shall include all lands and
improvements, lands under water, water front property, the water of any lake,
pond or stream, all easements and hereditaments, corporeal or incorporeal,
and every estate, interest and right, legal or equitable, in lands or water,
and right, interest, privilege, easement and franchise relating to the same,
including terms for years and liens by way judgment, mortgage or otherwise.



Section 211. Capital budget borough allocations.



   a.   Borough allocation. Five percent of the appropriations, funded
by debt supported by city tax levy funds and state and federal funds over
which the city has substantial discretion, proposed in the executive capital
budget for the ensuing fiscal year, except any lump sum appropriation for
school construction or rapid transit proposed to be made to public
authorities established pursuant to the provisions of state law, shall be
allocated among the boroughs by a formula based on an equal weighting of
factors relating to population and geographic area, and shall be known as the
capital budget borough allocation. Such formula shall be established by local
law, but in any fiscal year for which no such local law is effective such
amount shall be allocated among the boroughs on the basis of the average of
(i) each borough's share of the total population of the city, and (ii) each
borough's share of the total land area of the city.



   b.   Preliminary borough allocations; initial borough president
notification. Concomitantly with the submission of the preliminary capital
budget and preliminary certificate, the mayor shall inform each borough
president of the portion of the executive capital budget for the ensuing
fiscal year and of the executive capital budgets for each of the three
succeeding years that, pursuant to the formula required by subdivision a of
this section, would be allocated to each borough if the amount of the
appropriations proposed in the executive capital budget for each of such
fiscal years were the same as the maximum amounts of appropriations for such
years which the mayor anticipates to be certified in the preliminary
certificate issued in accordance with section two hundred thirty-five. The
amount of such portion shall be known as the preliminary capital budget
borough allocation.



   c.   Borough president proposals.



      1.   Each borough president, during the consultations required
by section two hundred forty-four, shall submit to the mayor, in such form as
the mayor shall prescribe, proposed capital appropriations in an amount not
exceeding that borough's allocation of the capital budget borough allocation
as certified by the mayor to the borough presidents during such
consultations. The timing of such certification shall allow sufficient time
for such consultations and for meeting the deadlines established by section
two hundred forty-nine. Each such proposed appropriation shall be accompanied
by the following information:



         (a)   for each such proposed appropriation for
construction of a capital project, the estimated annual cost to operate and
maintain the facility to be constructed pursuant to such appropriation when
construction is completed. Such estimates shall be prepared in accordance
with the standards established for this purpose pursuant to section two
hundred twenty-one of this chapter and shall be certified by the director of
the office of management and budget. In the event that a borough president
and the director of management and budget do not agree on such estimate for a
particular project, such director and the director of the independent budget
office shall jointly certify an estimate for such purpose;



         (b)   for each such proposed appropriation for the
planning and design of a capital project, (i) the estimated cost of the
construction of the project, and (ii) the fiscal year in which the borough
president intends to propose an appropriation for the construction of the
project, if no technical problems regarding the viability of the project are
identified during planning, site selection or design;



         (c)   the total of all appropriations which will be
necessary during the three ensuing fiscal years to provide for the
construction of projects for which planning and design appropriations are
being proposed.



      2.   If a borough president proposes an appropriation for the
construction of a capital project, the appropriation must provide for the
total amount estimated to be necessary for the completion of the project. If
such a proposed appropriation for the construction of a capital project is
for an amount which is less than the amount that the office of management and
budget estimates to be necessary for the completion of the project, the
borough's capital budget borough allocation in any future year in which
additional appropriations are necessary for the completion of the project
shall be reduced by the amount of such additional appropriations.



      3.   If the total appropriations necessary, during any of the
ensuing three fiscal years, to provide for the construction of (i) projects
for which the borough president is proposing appropriations for planning and
design, and (ii) projects for which appropriations were previously made for
planning and design on the recommendation of the borough president, is
greater than the capital budget borough allocation anticipated to be
available during such years based on the certificate issued pursuant to
paragraph sixteen of section two hundred fifty of this charter, then the
borough president shall submit for inclusion in the executive budget a list
of the projects requiring construction appropriations during such year, in
priority order.



      4.   If the estimated annual cost to operate and maintain the
capital projects being proposed for construction by a borough president is
greater than the amounts dedicated to such expense budget purposes from the
expense budget borough allocation and the capital budget borough allocation
expense budget contingency projected to be available to the borough president
in one or more ensuing fiscal years then such proposed appropriations may
only be included by a borough president in the capital budget with the
concurrence of the mayor.



   d.   The mayor shall include the proposed appropriations submitted
by the borough presidents in accordance with subdivision c of this section in
the executive capital budget provided however, that the mayor may also
include such comments and recommendations relating to such proposals as the
mayor deems appropriate.



Section 212. Format of departmental estimates for capital projects,
preliminary capital budget and executive capital budget.



   The departmental estimates for capital projects and the executive
capital budget shall consist of a detailed estimate of all capital projects
pending or which the agency head, for departmental estimates, or the mayor,
for the executive budget, believes should be undertaken within the ensuing
fiscal year and the three succeeding fiscal years. Each agency head, for
departmental estimates, and the mayor, for the executive budget, shall submit
a written response to each of the capital budget priorities included in the
community board's statement of budget priorities submitted in accordance with
section two hundred thirty. Such responses shall include the response of the
agency head and the mayor, as appropriate, regarding the disposition of each
such priority and meaningful explanations of any disapprovals contained in
such estimates or budget.



Section 213. Preliminary capital budget.



   The preliminary capital budget shall consist of: (1) a financial plan,
consistent with section two hundred fifty-eight, covering estimates of
capital expenditures for the four ensuing fiscal years, (2) departmental
estimates for capital projects as provided in section two hundred twelve
together with the cash flow requirements and proposed sources of funding for
each project included in such estimates, (3) a capital program status report
which sets forth the appropriations for each project included in the capital
budget for the current fiscal year together with the expenditures to date,
and (4) a summary description of the purpose of each capital project and the
needs it will fulfill, the schedule for beginning and constructing the
project, its period of probable usefulness and an appropriate maintenance
schedule.



Section 214. Executive capital budget.



   a.   The executive capital budget shall set forth separately each
capital project, including the capital projects proposed by the borough
presidents in accordance with section two hundred eleven, and shall include:



      (1)   A brief description and the location of each project;
the total estimated cost of the project; the appropriations which have been
previously adopted for this project; the amount of appropriations recommended
to be adopted for the ensuing fiscal year, the aggregate amount of which
shall not exceed the amount in the mayor's certificate; the amount of
appropriations required thereafter to complete the project; the sources of
funds for the project including state, federal, private and other funds; the
period of probable usefulness; the estimated additional annual maintenance
and operation costs; any terms and conditions of the project; and the
estimated dates of completion of final scope, final design and final
construction;



      (2)   A listing of all pending projects; and any
recommendations that any pending projects be modified, rescinded or postponed
accompanied by a statement of the budgetary impact of any such action; and



      (3)   A listing of proposed capital projects by community
district and by borough and an identification of those projects which were
included in the statement of capital priorities submitted by each community
board and borough board.



   b.   The executive capital program shall set forth for both program
categories and individual projects:



      (1)   A statement for each of the three succeeding fiscal
years of the total dollar amounts necessary to complete projects initiated in
prior years and projects proposed in the executive budget, the amounts
necessary for projects proposed to be initiated in future years and the
amounts necessary for amendments and contingencies; and



      (2)   A statement of the likely impact on the expense budget
of staffing, maintaining and operating the capital projects included in or
contemplated by the capital program.



Section 215. Ten-year capital strategy.



   a.   The ten-year capital strategy shall be issued by the mayor
pursuant to section two hundred forty-eight after (i) submission of a
preliminary strategy by the department of city planning and the office of
management and budget pursuant to section two hundred twenty-eight, and (ii)
submission of a report on the preliminary strategy by the city planning
commission following a public hearing, pursuant to section two hundred
thirty-four.



   b.   Contents of ten-year capital strategy. Each ten-year capital
strategy shall include:



      (1)   a narrative describing the strategy for the development
of the city's capital facilities for the ensuing ten fiscal years; the
factors underlying such strategy including goals, policies, constraints and
assumptions and the criteria for assessment of capital needs; the anticipated
sources of financing for such strategy; and the implications of the strategy,
including possible economic, social and environmental effects;



      (2)   tables presenting the capital commitments estimated to
be made during each of the ensuing ten fiscal years, by program category and
agency. Where relevant the anticipated sources of financing for particular
categories and projects shall be specified; and



      (3)   a map or maps which illustrate major components of the
strategy as relevant.



   c.   In the preparation of the preliminary ten-year capital
strategy, the department of city planning and office of management and budget
shall consider (i) the strategic policy statements of the mayor and the
borough presidents pursuant to section seventeen, (ii) relevant citywide,
borough and community plans adopted pursuant to section one hundred ninety
seven-a, and (iii) the reports pursuant to section two hundred fifty-seven
comparing the most recent ten-year capital strategy with the capital budgets
and programs adopted for the current and previous fiscal years.



Section 216. Amendment.



   a.   Upon receipt of a recommendation in writing from the mayor or a
borough president, in manner specified herein, the council may amend the
capital budget or capital program in the same manner as the adoption of the
capital budget and capital program including the right to approve the
proposed amendment as submitted or to increase or decrease the amounts of
funds proposed to be appropriated thereby, but only if funds are available
within the capital budget and the applicable program category of the capital
program; provided, however, that (i) the mayor may only recommend such an
amendment relating to an appropriation included in the capital budget
pursuant to section two hundred eleven with the concurrence of the relevant
borough president; and (ii) the borough president may only make such a
recommendation with regard to such an appropriation if it provides for an
offsetting reduction in another appropriation included in the capital budget
pursuant to section two hundred eleven on the recommendation of such borough
president and it is concurred in by the mayor.



   b.   Upon the adoption of any such amendment by the council, it
shall be certified by the mayor, the public advocate and the city clerk and
the capital budget shall be amended accordingly.



   c.   Not later than five days after such certification such
amendment shall be filed in the office of the comptroller and shall be
published forthwith in the City Record.



Section 217. Restrictions on capital projects.



   a.   No obligations of the city shall be issued or authorized for or
on account of any capital project not included in a capital budget, or for
which funds have not been reserved in an appropriate program category of the
capital program for any year of such program in which it is projected that
funds will be expended for the completion of the project, or in excess of the
maximum amount of obligations which may be issued on account of such project
as fixed in such capital budget; and no amount may be expended on account of
any capital project in excess of the amount appropriated for such purposes in
a capital budget, except that the amount appropriated for such purposes may
be increased by the mayor by not more than fifteen per centum thereof in
order to meet any costs required to advance such project. Notice of any such
increase shall be provided to the council together with a statement of
identifiable funds available for payment of the increase.



   b.   Funds included in the capital budget for a capital project that
are not obligated or committed during the fiscal year in which appropriated
shall not be obligated or committed in the subsequent fiscal year unless
reappropriated in a subsequent capital budget or an amendment thereto. A
capital project included in a capital budget that is not initiated by the
expenditure of funds within two years after its inclusion in the budget shall
be eliminated from the budget.



   c.   The city may issue capital debt only to finance capital
projects as defined in section two hundred ten. The capital budget may not
include expense items that are properly includable only in the expense
budget, as determined in accordance with the accounting principles set forth
in the state comptroller's uniform system of accounts for municipalities, as
the same may be modified by the state comptroller, in consultation with the
city comptroller, for application to the city.



   d.   No capital project shall be included in the proposed executive
capital budget or otherwise adopted as part of the capital budget or as an
amendment thereto unless sufficient funds are available within the
appropriate general program category of the capital program for any year of
such program in which it is projected that additional appropriations will be
necessary for the completion of the project.



Section 218. Site selection.



   a.   The selection of sites for capital projects shall be pursuant
to the uniform procedures provided pursuant to sections one hundred
ninety-seven-c and one hundred ninety-seven-d, except for acquisition of
office space pursuant to section one hundred ninety-five.



   b.   To the maximum extent feasible, final approval of a site for a
capital project shall occur prior to or simultaneously with the approval of
the scope of the project pursuant to this chapter.



   c.   During the review required by subdivision a, the community
board and borough president shall also review, and may comment on, the scope
of the project.



Section 219. Project initiation; commitment plan.



   a.   The inclusion of a capital project in the capital budget as
adopted or amended shall constitute a direction and order to the agency to
proceed with the preparation of a scope of project pursuant to this chapter
unless sufficient planning funds for such purpose have not been appropriated
in the capital budget. The head of the agency shall notify the comptroller of
the amount of appropriated planning funds to be encumbered for such purpose.



   b.   The approval of a scope of project for a capital project
pursuant to this chapter, including the amount of obligations necessary to
finance the design and construction of the project, shall constitute a
direction and order to the agency to design the project, unless sufficient
funds for such purpose have not been appropriated in the capital budget or
are otherwise not available within the appropriate program category of the
capital program. Such approval shall constitute notification to the
comptroller of the comptroller's authorization to expend appropriated design
funds.



   c.   The approval of the final design for a capital project pursuant
to this chapter shall constitute a direction and order to the agency
responsible for construction to prepare bid and award documents and to
proceed to bid, unless sufficient funds for such purpose have not been
appropriated in the capital budget or are otherwise not available within each
year of the capital program in which it is projected that funds will be
expended for the completion of the project. Such approval shall constitute
notification to the comptroller of the comptroller's authorization to expend
appropriated construction funds.



   d.   The mayor shall require each agency to prepare and submit
periodic reports in regard to the progress of its capital projects, including
schedules and clear explanations of any delays for particular prospects and
summary information on each agency's record on such matters. Such reports
shall be published at least three times each year: within ninety days of the
adoption of the capital budget; with the preliminary capital budget; and with
the executive capital budget. Copies of such reports shall be transmitted by
the mayor to the council, the city planning commission, and the community
boards, the borough boards and borough presidents. Such reports shall
include, for each project, the dates set in the adopted capital budget for
the completion of scope, design, and construction and any changes in such
dates.



      1.   The report issued with the executive budget shall
include, for each new capital project being proposed in the executive budget,
a description of the project including, to the extent practicable, the
information required to be included in a scope of project by paragraph four
of section two hundred ten.



      2.   The report issued following the adoption of the budget
shall include, for each capital project added to the budget, a description of
the project including, to the extent practicable, the information required to
be included in a scope of project by paragraph four of section two hundred
ten.



      3.   The report issued following the adoption of the budget
shall include, for each capital project for which a substantial change was
made, a revised description of the project including, to the extent
practicable, the information required to be included in a scope of project by
paragraph four of section two hundred ten.



   e.   Any capital project which results in the acquisition or
construction of a capital asset which will be subject to the requirements of
section eleven hundred ten-a shall contain a provision requiring a
comprehensive manual setting forth the useful life of the asset and
explaining the activities necessary to maintain the asset throughout such
useful life.



   f.   The mayor may issue directives and adopt rules and regulations
in regard to the execution of capital projects, consistent with the
requirements of subdivisions a, b, c and d of this section, which shall be
binding upon all agencies.



Section 220. Improvements payable other than by city.



   Any owner of real property or any other person interested may apply to
the council to authorize an improvement referred to in paragraph d of
subdivision one of section two hundred ten hereof, not included in the
capital budget. The council may authorize such improvement to be made by the
city or by such owner or other person interested upon compliance with the
following conditions:



      1.   Such owner or group or other persons interested shall
enter into an agreement with the city, whereby they will either authorize the
city, or themselves agree, to perform such work in accordance with such plans
and specifications approved by the agencies having jurisdiction thereover and
under their supervision.



      2.   All of such work shall be done for the account of or at
the sole cost and expense of the person or persons applying for permission to
do the same, who shall furnish to the city such security and in such amount
as may be required to secure the payment of such cost and expense or the
proper performance of the said work in the time and in the manner agreed
upon, and shall further secure the city, in the latter case, against latent
defects in such work for a period of two years.



      3.   Such improvement shall be approved by the city planning
commission and reviewed pursuant to sections one hundred ninety-seven-c and
one hundred ninety-seven-d.



      4.   Any agreement providing for the performance of such work
and the furnishing of such security, shall be first approved by the council
before the same shall become effective.



Section 221. Standards for capital projects.



   The mayor shall prepare general standards and cost limits for
categories of capital projects and standards for the preparation of the scope
of project for capital projects of various types. Such standards and limits
shall be submitted by the mayor to the council for review. The proposed
standards shall become effective thirty days after they have been filed with
the council unless within that time the council modifies or disapproves them
or part of them, after conducting a public hearing. Any modification by the
council shall be subject to disapproval by the mayor in accordance with
section thirty-eight and any such disapproval shall be subject to override by
the council in accordance with such section.



Section 222. Scope of project.



   a.   Each agency, with respect to a capital project under its
jurisdiction included in a capital budget, shall prepare a proposed scope of
project within appropriated planning funds. In preparing the proposed scope
of project, the agency shall consult with the community board for the
community district in which the capital project is to be located. The
proposed scope of project, or, in the case of a delay, an explanation for
such delay along with a revised schedule, shall be submitted to the mayor and
to the respective council committee, borough president and community board by
the date specified in the adopted capital budget in which the capital project
is included. Such proposed scope shall identify all substantial differences
between the guidelines for the capital project as contained in such scope and
the description of the capital project contained in the report issued
pursuant to subdivision d of section two hundred nineteen at the time such
project was proposed in the executive budget or following the budget adoption
in which such project was added to the capital budget.



   b.   Not later than sixty days after receipt of the proposed scope
of project from an agency pursuant to subdivision a of this section, the
mayor shall approve, modify, or disapprove the proposed scope of project and
notify the agency, and the respective council committee, borough president
and community board. In the case of a scope approved by the mayor with
modifications, such notification shall include a copy of the scope as
approved.



   c.   During the review of the selection of a site of a capital
project pursuant to the uniform land use review procedure established by
section one hundred ninety-seven-c, the community board and borough president
shall also review, and may comment on, the scope of the project.



   d.   No scope of project shall be approved by the mayor unless (1)
it contains the information required by paragraph four of section two hundred
ten and it conforms to the applicable standards for the type of project
adopted pursuant to this chapter, and (2) funds are available within the
appropriate program category of the capital program that can be reserved for
each fiscal year required to complete the project.



Section 223. Design of capital project.



   The proposed design and final design for a capital project shall be
made available for review to the respective council committee, borough
president and the community board for the community district in which the
project is to be located. The mayor or his representative shall review the
final design to determine its conformance with the approved scope of project
pursuant to this chapter.



Section 224. Works of art.



   a.   For purposes of this section:



      Demographic information. The term "demographic information"
includes age, gender, race and any other related information the department
of cultural affairs deems relevant.



      Design agency. The term "design agency" means the agency
responsible for the preparation of the design for the capital project that
includes works of art pursuant to this section.



      Sponsor agency. The term "sponsor agency" means the agency whose
capital project is subject to the provisions of this section.



      Works of art. The term "works of art" includes all forms of the
visual and performing arts conceived in any medium, material or combination
thereof.



   b.   Works of art shall be provided for each capital project which
involves the construction or the substantial reconstruction of a city-owned
public building or structure the intended use of which requires that it be
accessible to the public generally or to members of the public participating
in, requiring or receiving programs, services or benefits provided thereat.



   c.   An amount not less than one percent of the first fifty million
dollars and one-half of one percent of any amount in excess of fifty million
dollars of capital funds appropriated by the city for each such capital
project, other than funds appropriated for the acquisition of real property,
shall be allocated for works of art; provided, however, that this section
shall in no case require, but shall not prohibit, the expenditure of more
than nine hundred thousand dollars for works of art for any capital project
nor more than the sum of four million dollars for all works of art in any
fiscal year. The mayor may exempt a capital project from the provisions of
this section if in the mayor's sole judgment the inclusion of works of art as
provided hereby would be inappropriate.



   d.   1.   The department of cultural affairs shall engage in
outreach and education efforts regarding the opportunity to submit works of
art for consideration for inclusion in capital projects as provided for by
this section. Such outreach and education efforts shall include but not be
limited to information sessions in each borough that shall be open to the
public and the development of written materials that describe the submission
and selection process for works of art. The department shall make such
written materials available in a manner deemed appropriate by the department,
including but not limited to making such materials available to arts and
cultural organizations, community-based organizations, and colleges and
universities. Such written materials shall be made available in English and
in the six languages most commonly spoken by limited English proficient
individuals in the city as determined by the department of city planning.



      2.   Reasonable advance notification of the intention to
include works of art in a project shall be provided to the appropriate
council member, borough president and chairperson of the community board of
the community district in which the project is located. Reasonable advance
notification of the intention to include works of art in a project shall also
be posted on the website of the department of cultural affairs. Following
notification of the intention to include works of art in any project, the
department of cultural affairs shall hold or present at a public meeting,
such as a meeting of the community board of the community district in which
the project is located, on such works of art prior to such inclusion. A
notice of such public meeting shall be posted on the website of the
department of cultural affairs not less than fourteen days prior to any such
meeting. All such works of art shall be subject to the approval of the art
commission pursuant to section eight hundred fifty-four of this charter.



   e.   The mayor shall adopt rules and regulations to implement the
provisions of this section.



   f.   The department of cultural affairs shall post on the
department’s website information about works of art that were included in a
capital project pursuant to this section after the effective date of the
local law that added this subdivision.



      1.   Such information shall include but not be limited to the
name of the work of art; name of the artist; capital project completion date;
medium and dimensions of the work of art; location of the work of art,
including council district and borough; sponsor agency; and design agency.



      2.   The department shall post on the department’s website
aggregated demographic information about the artists whose works of art are
subject to the provisions of this subdivision, to the extent such demographic
information is provided to the department.



   g.   There shall be an advisory panel to recommend eligible works of
art to be included in a capital project pursuant to this section. The
commissioner of cultural affairs or his or her designee shall serve as
chairperson of such panel and shall ensure that such panel includes members
who are knowledgeable about public art, knowledgeable about the project, and
knowledgeable about the community in which the project will be located. The
panel shall further include but not be limited to at least one representative
of the president of the borough in which the project will be located, at
least one representative of the council member in whose district the project
will be located, and at least one representative of the community board for
the community district in which the project will be located, provided,
however, that such representatives shall be non-voting ex officio members.



(Am. L.L. 2015/052, 6/2/2015; Am. L.L. 2017/019, 2/15/2017; Am. L.L.
2017/021, 2/15/2017; Am. L.L. 2017/022, 2/15/2017; Am. L.L. 2017/023,
2/15/2017)



Section 224.1. Green building standards.



Editor's note: this Section 224.1 was substantially amended by L.L. 2016/031
and L.L. 2016/032, both enacted 3/28/2016, to appear as set out below.
Section 4 of L.L. 2016/032 provides the following regarding its effectiveness
and applicability: [ALP S-001]

"This local law takes effect immediately, except that this local law shall
apply only to capital projects which are added to the capital plan on or
after July 1, 2017. All other capital projects shall comply with section
224.1 of such charter, as in effect before the effective date of this local
law, subject to the provisions of section four of local law 86 for the year
2005." [ALP S-001]

For the convenience of the code user, the version of this Section 224.1 as it
existed immediately prior to the effectiveness of L.L. 2016/032 may be viewed
in its entirety by clicking here.



   a.   As used in this section the following terms shall have the
following meanings:



      Capital project. The term "capital project" means a capital
project as defined in section 210 of this chapter that is paid for in whole
or in part from the city treasury.



      City agency. The term "city agency" means a city, county,
borough, or other office, position, administration, department, division,
bureau, board or commission, or a corporation, institution or agency of
government, the expenses of which are paid, in whole or in part, from the
city treasury.



      Construction work. The term "construction work" means any work or
operations necessary or incidental to the erection, demolition, assembling,
alteration, installing, or equipping of any building.



      Green building standards. The term "green building standards"
means design guidelines, a rating system or rules for constructing buildings
that ensure site planning, water efficiency, energy efficiency and renewable
energy, conservation of materials and resources and indoor environmental
quality.



      Inflation. The term "inflation" shall mean the annual 12-month
average of the consumer price index published by the United States department
of labor.



      LEED energy and atmosphere: optimize energy performance credit.
The term "LEED energy and atmosphere: optimize energy performance credit"
means the credit to achieve points under LEED for New Construction version 4
intended to achieve increased energy performance.



      LEED green building rating system. The term "LEED green building
rating system" means a version of the Leadership in Energy and Environmental
Design (LEED) building rating system published by the U.S. Green Building
Council, not less stringent than the selected green building rating system,
including a standard developed by or for the city consisting of practices and
technologies derived from the LEED rating system that are reasonable and
appropriate for building in New York city.



      LEED water efficiency: indoor water use reduction credit. The
term "LEED water efficiency: indoor water use reduction credit" means the
credit to achieve points under the LEED for New Construction version 4
intended to achieve water use reduction.



      Not less stringent. The term "not less stringent" means providing
no less net environmental and health benefits.



      Occupancy group. The term "occupancy group" means occupancy group
as classified in accordance with the New York city construction codes.



      Rehabilitation work. The term "rehabilitation work" means any
restoration, replacement or repair of any materials, systems and/or
components.



      Selected green building rating system. The term "selected green
building rating system" means the U.S. Green Building Council; provided,
however, at the mayor's discretion, the term "selected green building rating
system" shall mean] Building Design and Construction version 4, Building
Operations and Maintenance version 4 or Interior Design and Construction
version 4 of the building rating system published by the U.S. Green Building
Council, whichever is most appropriate for the project under U.S. Green
Building Council guidelines.



      Substantial reconstruction. For buildings other than buildings
classified in occupancy group R, the term "substantial reconstruction" means
a capital project in which (i) the scope of work includes rehabilitation work
in at least two of the following three major systems of the building:
electrical, HVAC (heating, ventilating and air conditioning) and plumbing,
and (ii) construction work affects at least 50 percent of the building's
floor area. For buildings classified in occupancy group R, the term
"substantial reconstruction" means a capital project that includes (i)
heating system replacement, (ii) work on at least 75 percent of dwelling
units contained within such building, including but not limited to fixture
replacements in kitchens and bathrooms, and (iii) substantial work on the
building envelope, including but not limited to the addition of building wide
air sealing measures performed in conjunction with window replacements on at
least 50 percent of total glazing, addition of roof insulation on 100 percent
of the roof or the addition of at least 50 percent wall insulation.



   b.   (1)   Except as provided in paragraphs (3) of this
subdivision, each capital project with an estimated construction cost of
$2,000,000 or more involving (i) the construction of a new building, (ii) an
addition to an existing building, or (iii) the substantial reconstruction of
an existing building shall be designed and constructed to comply with green
building standards not less stringent than the standards prescribed for
buildings designed in accordance with the LEED green building rating system
to achieve a LEED gold or higher rating, or, with respect to buildings
classified in groups F or H, to achieve a LEED certified or higher rating, or
with respect to buildings classified in occupancy group R, to comply with the
version of the New York city overlay of the Enterprise green communities
criteria in effect as of the effective date of the local law adding paragraph
(3) of this subdivision, or the version of such criteria designated by the
department of housing preservation and development by rule; provided that
capital projects with an estimated construction cost of less than $10,000,000
and that involve only an addition to or substantial reconstruction of an
existing building classified in occupancy groups F or H are exempted from
complying with this subdivision; and further provided that capital projects
with an estimated construction cost of $10,000,000 or more involving an
addition to or substantial reconstruction of an existing building classified
in occupancy groups F or H may be designed and constructed as low energy
intensity buildings, as defined in subdivision l of this section, in lieu of
complying with this subdivision. If the mayor elects to utilize green
building standards other than the LEED green building rating system, the
mayor shall publish findings demonstrating that such other green building
standards are not less stringent than the LEED standards described above for
achievement of a LEED gold or, if applicable, a LEED certified rating. The
green building standards utilized by the city in accordance with this section
shall be reviewed and updated, as necessary, by the mayor no less often that
once every three years.



      (2)   In addition, if the estimated construction cost of a
capital project required to comply with green building standards in
accordance with paragraph (1) of this subdivision is $12,000,000 or more,
such project shall be designed and constructed to reduce energy cost as
follows; provided that this paragraph shall not apply to capital projects
involving city-owned buildings or buildings classified in occupancy groups E
or R:



         (i)   Capital projects with an estimated construction
cost of $12,000,000 or more but less than $30,000,000 shall be designed and
constructed to reduce energy cost by a minimum of 20 percent, as determined
by the methodology prescribed in LEED energy and atmosphere: optimize energy
performance credit or the New York state energy conservation code, whichever
is more stringent. In addition to such 20 percent reduction in energy cost,
the design agency shall make investments in energy efficiency that reduce
energy cost by an additional five percent if it finds that the payback on
such investment through savings in energy cost would not exceed seven years.



         (ii)   Capital projects with an estimated construction
cost of $30,000,000 or more shall be designed and constructed to reduce
energy cost by a minimum of 25 percent, as determined by the methodology
prescribed in LEED energy and atmosphere: optimize energy performance credit
or the New York state energy conservation code, whichever is more stringent.
In addition to such 25 percent reduction in energy cost, the design agency
shall make investments in energy efficiency that reduce energy cost by an
additional five percent if it finds that the payback on such investment
through savings in energy cost would not exceed seven years.



      (3)   For capital projects required to comply with paragraph
(1) of this subdivision which are buildings classified in occupancy groups E,
I-2 or in any occupancy group that, before the enactment of the local law
adding this paragraph, was not required to comply with paragraph (1) of this
subdivision, the mayor or an office or agency designated by the mayor may, in
conjunction with the New York city economic development corporation, the New
York city school construction authority and any other relevant offices or
agencies, establish alternative design and construction standards. Such
alternative standards may be as stringent or more stringent than the
standards described by paragraph (1) of this subdivision. For buildings that
are not classified in occupancy group E, such alternative standards may be
less stringent than the standards described by paragraph (1) of this
subdivision if the mayor or such designated office or agency determines that
compliance with the standards described by such paragraph would be
impracticable or unduly burdensome for a particular occupancy group; provided
that such alternative standards may be less stringent than the standards
described by such paragraph only to the minimum extent necessary and, except
in the case of alternative standards prescribed for buildings classified in
occupancy group R, shall be not less stringent than standards prescribed for
buildings designed to achieve a LEED certified rating under version 4 of the
LEED green building rating system. For buildings that are classified in
occupancy group E, such alternative standards may be the New York city green
schools guide in effect as of the effective date of the local law adding this
paragraph, or the version of such guide designated by rule by the mayor or
such designated office or agency; provided that such alternative standards
are not less stringent than standards prescribed for buildings designed to
achieve a LEED certified rating under version 4 of the LEED green building
rating system. If the mayor or such designated office or agency establishes
alternative standards under this paragraph, the mayor or such designated
office or agency shall:



         (i)   Within 60 days after adopting such alternative
standards, submit to the council and make publicly available online a report
that, at a minimum:



            (A)   Describes such standards and the occupancy
groups to which they will apply;



            (B)   Identifies any provisions in such standards
that are less stringent than the standards described in paragraph (1) of this
subdivision and, for each such provision, sets forth the reasons why
compliance with the standards described in such paragraph would be
impracticable or unduly burdensome for buildings classified in such occupancy
groups;



            (C)   Except in the case of alternative standards
prescribed for buildings classified in occupancy group R, describes how such
alternative standards are not less stringent than the standards prescribed
for buildings designed to achieve a LEED certified rating under version 4 of
the LEED green building rating system; and



         (ii)   If such alternative standards are less stringent
than the standards described in paragraph (1) of this subdivision, in every
third fiscal year thereafter, submit to the council and make publicly
available online a report that, at a minimum, states whether the mayor or
such designated office or agency has determined that such less stringent
standards continue to be necessary and, if so, a description of the reasons
therefor and whether such standards can reasonably be made more stringent.



   c.   Capital projects, other than those required to comply with
green building standards in accordance with subdivision b of this section,
shall be subject to the following:



      (1)   Each capital project that includes the installation or
replacement of a boiler at an estimated construction cost for such
installation or replacement of $2,000,000 or more, or that involves the
installation or replacement of lighting systems in a building at an estimated
construction cost for such installation or replacement of $1,000,000 or more,
shall be designed and constructed to reduce energy cost by a minimum of ten
percent, as determined by the methodology prescribed in LEED energy and
atmosphere: optimize energy performance credit or the New York state energy
conservation code, whichever is more stringent; provided that compliance with
this paragraph shall not be required for capital projects that would be
subject to this paragraph solely because such project involves replacement of
a boiler, unless the cost of such project equals or exceeds 50 percent of the
cost of replacing the heating distribution system of such building.



      (2)   Each capital project, other than a project required to
comply with paragraph (1) of this subdivision, that involves the installation
or replacement of HVAC systems at an estimated construction cost for such
installation or replacement of $2,000,000 or more, shall be designed and
constructed to reduce energy cost by a minimum of five percent as determined
by the methodology prescribed in LEED energy and atmosphere: optimize energy
performance credit or the New York state energy conservation code, whichever
is more stringent.



   d.   In addition to complying with any other applicable subdivision
in this section, each capital project involving the installation or
replacement of plumbing systems that includes the installation or replacement
of plumbing fixtures at an estimated construction cost for such installation
or replacement of plumbing systems of $500,000 or more shall be designed and
constructed to reduce potable water consumption in the aggregate by a minimum
of 30 percent, as determined by a methodology not less stringent than that
prescribed in LEED water efficiency: indoor water use reduction credit;
provided, however, that such percentage shall be reduced to a minimum of 20
percent if the department of buildings rejects an application for the use of
waterless urinals for the project.



   e.   This section shall not apply to capital projects that only
involve buildings classified in occupancy groups A-5 or U.



   f.   The mayor may exempt from each provision of this section
capital projects accounting for up to 20 percent of the capital dollars in
each fiscal year subject to such provision if in such mayor's sole judgment
such exemption is necessary in the public interest. At the conclusion of each
fiscal year the mayor shall report to the council the exemptions granted
pursuant to this section.



   g.   This section shall not apply to capital projects of entities
that are not city agencies unless 50 percent or more of the estimated cost of
such project is to be paid for out of the city treasury. This exemption shall
not apply to any capital project that receives $10,000,000 or more out of the
city treasury.



   h.   This section shall not apply to capital projects that have
received capital dollars from the city treasury before January 1, 2007.



   i.   The mayor shall promulgate rules to carry out the provisions of
this section.



   j.   The costs listed in subdivisions b, c, d and g of this section
are denominated in January 2007 dollars and shall be indexed to inflation
annually.



   k.   Capital projects that are subject to paragraph (1) of
subdivision b of this section that utilize a version of the LEED green
building rating system for which the U.S. Green Building Council will accept
applications for certification, shall apply to the U.S. Green Building
Council for certification that such projects have achieved a gold or higher
rating under the LEED green building rating system. The mayor or an office or
agency designated by the mayor shall by rule establish an alternative
certification process for capital projects that are complying with
alternative standards promulgated by the mayor or such designated office or
agency under paragraph (3) of subdivision b of this section.



   l.   (1)   As used in this subdivision:



         ASHRAE 90.1-2013. The term "ASHRAE 90.1-2013" means the
2013 edition of the energy standard for buildings except low-rise residential
buildings, standard reference number 90.1-2013, published by the American
society of heating, refrigerating and air conditioning engineers (ASHRAE).



         Base building systems. The term "base building systems" has
the same meaning as set forth in section 28-308.1 of the administrative code.



         Design energy use intensity. The term "design energy use
intensity" means, for a building, the source energy use intensity projected
for such building based on its design at the time of filing with the
department of buildings.



         Energy use intensity baseline. The term "energy use
intensity baseline" means, for a building either (i) the median source energy
use intensity for buildings designed and constructed for similar uses
according to benchmarking data obtained under article 309 of title 28 of the
administrative code within the year preceding the effective date of the local
law that added this paragraph or (ii) the design energy use intensity of such
building if designed and constructed according to the prescriptive and
mandatory requirements of ASHRAE 90.1-2013.



         Low energy intensity building. The term "low energy
intensity building" means (i) a building that is not classified in occupancy
groups F or H and that has been designed and constructed such that its design
energy use intensity is equal to or less than (A) the low energy intensity
target for such building or (B) if the mayor, or an office or agency
designated by the mayor, has adopted an alternative low energy intensity
target pursuant to paragraph (3) of this subdivision, such alternative target
or (ii) a building that is classified in occupancy groups F or H and that has
been designed and constructed such that (A) the energy usage of its base
building systems, exclusive of process loads, is equal to or less than the
low energy intensity target for such building or, if the mayor, or an office
or agency designated by the mayor, has adopted an alternative low energy
intensity target pursuant to paragraph (3) of this subdivision, such
alternative target for such building or (B) its design energy use intensity
is at least 50 percent below the median source energy use intensity for
buildings designed and constructed for similar uses according to benchmarking
data obtained under article 309 of title 28 of the administrative code within
the year preceding the effective date of the local law that added this
paragraph.



         Low energy intensity target. The term "low energy intensity
target" means, (i) for a building that is not classified in occupancy groups
F or H, the less stringent of (A) 50 percent below the energy use intensity
baseline or (B) for new buildings, a source energy use intensity of 38
kBTU/yr per square foot of floor area and for additions to, or substantial
reconstructions of, existing buildings, a source energy use intensity of 42
kBTU/yr per square foot of floor area and (ii) for a building classified in
occupancy groups F or H, energy usage of the base building systems, exclusive
of process loads, which is at least 50 percent less than such energy usage
would be if such building were designed and constructed according to ASHRAE
90.1-2013.



         Net zero energy building. The term "net zero energy
building" means a building that has been designed and constructed to produce
energy onsite from renewable energy sources in an amount equal to or greater
than such building's total energy needs.



         Onsite energy generating building. The term "onsite energy
generating building" means a building that has been designed and constructed
to produce energy onsite from renewable energy sources in an amount equal to
or greater than ten percent of such building's total energy needs.



         Renewable energy sources. The term "renewable energy
sources" means qualified energy resources, as such term is defined in section
45 of title 26 of the United States code. Source energy use intensity. The
term "source energy use intensity" means, for a building, the total energy
used by such building in a year, including losses that take place during
generation, transmission and distribution of such energy, divided by the
building's gross floor area.



      (2)   (i)   Each capital project that involves the
construction of a new city-owned building and each capital project that
involves an addition to an existing city-owned building or the substantial
reconstruction of an existing city-owned building, where such substantial
reconstruction involves substantial work on the building envelope, shall be
designed and constructed as a low energy intensity building.



         (ii)   For each capital project subject to subparagraph
(i) of this paragraph the design agency shall consider the feasibility of
designing and constructing such project as an onsite energy generating
building.



         (iii)   For each capital project subject to subparagraph
(i) of this paragraph with an estimated height of no more than three stories
above grade, the design agency shall consider the feasibility of designing
and constructing such project as a net zero energy building.



         (iv)    For each capital project subject to subparagraph
(i) of this paragraph the design agency shall consider the feasibility of
designing and constructing such project to incorporate green infrastructure.



         (v)   This paragraph shall apply only to capital
projects which are added to the capital plan on or after July 1, 2017.



      (3)   The mayor, or an office or agency designated by the
mayor, may establish an alternative low energy intensity target for buildings
designed and constructed for a particular use, or for additions to, or
substantial reconstructions of, existing buildings. Such alternative target
may be equivalent to or more stringent than the low energy intensity target
or, if the mayor or such designated office or agency determines that
compliance with subparagraph (i) of paragraph (2) of this subdivision would
be impracticable or unduly burdensome for such buildings or such work using
the low energy intensity target, less stringent than such target. Where the
mayor or such designated office or agency adopts such an alternative target,
the mayor or such designated office or agency shall, no later than 60 days
after such adoption, submit to the council and make publicly available online
a report describing such alternative target and the types of buildings or
work to which it will apply. If such alternative target is less stringent
than the corresponding low energy intensity target, such report shall set
forth the reasons that compliance with subparagraph (i) of paragraph (2) of
this subdivision using such low energy intensity target would be
impracticable or unduly burdensome for such types of buildings or work and,
in each fiscal year thereafter, the mayor or such designated office or agency
shall submit to the council and make publicly available online a report
stating whether the mayor or such designated office or agency has determined
that such alternative targets continue to be necessary and, if so, a
description of the reasons therefor and whether such targets can reasonably
be made more stringent.



      (4)   No later than January 1, 2017, the mayor shall submit to
the speaker of the council and make publicly available online a plan for
ensuring that by 2030 capital projects subject to paragraph (2) of this
subdivision will be designed and constructed so that new buildings have a
source energy use intensity no greater than 38 kBTU/yr per square foot of
floor area and that additions to, or substantial reconstructions of, existing
buildings have a source energy use intensity of no greater than 42 kBTU/yr
per square foot of floor area. Such plan shall include a list of policies,
programs and actions that the city will seek to undertake to achieve such
targets.



      (5)   In 2019 and every third year thereafter, the mayor
shall, by June 30 of such year, submit to the speaker of the council and make
publicly available online a report containing, at a minimum, recommended
practices for designing and constructing low energy intensity buildings.



   m.   By no later than December 1 of each year, the mayor shall
submit to the speaker of the council a report, in accordance with the
procedure and format established by the department of design and
construction, containing, at a minimum, the following information:



      (1)   for each capital project subject to this section
completed during the preceding fiscal year:



         (i)   a brief description of such project, including the
total cost of the project;



         (ii)   the street address of such project and the
community district and council district in which such project is located;



         (iii)   the estimated level of LEED certification such
project has achieved as determined by the city agency that designed such
project in accordance with the LEED green building rating system or, if
applicable, the level achieved, as certified by the U.S. Green Building
Council;



         (iv)   additional costs attributed to complying with the
LEED green building rating system or any other green building standard;



         (v)   a statement as to whether such project has been
designed and constructed as a low energy intensity building, onsite energy
generating building or a net zero energy building and, for each project
designed and constructed as a low energy intensity building, the low energy
intensity target for such building or if the mayor, or an office or agency
designated by the mayor, has adopted an alternative low energy intensity
target pursuant to paragraph (3) of this subdivision, such alternative target;



         (vi)   if such capital project was not designed and
constructed as an onsite energy generating building, a description of the
reasons therefor, a statement as to whether such building has been designed
and constructed to produce any energy onsite from renewable energy sources
and, if so, the amount of such onsite energy production expressed as a
percentage of the building's total energy needs;



         (vii)   additional costs attributable to complying with
the low energy intensity building requirements, the onsite energy generating
requirements and the net zero energy building requirements of paragraph (2)
of subdivision 1 of this section; and



         (viii)   an assessment of the health, environmental and
energy-related benefits achieved in comparison with a base-case code
compliant project, including projected energy savings and reductions in peak
load, reductions in emissions and potable water use;



      (2)   for each capital project subject to paragraph (2) of
subdivision l that was commissioned before the preceding fiscal year and that
is not a low energy intensity building, a summary of remedial actions taken
and to be taken and the anticipated or actual start and completion dates of
such actions;



      (3)   a summary of agency findings related to additional
investment in energy efficiency pursuant to subparagraphs (i) and (ii) of
paragraph 2 of subdivision b of this section, including any additional
investment in energy efficiency considered and the estimated payback time for
such investment through savings in energy cost; and



      (4)   the total value of capital allocations in the preceding
calendar year to projects exempted from the requirements of this section by
the mayor pursuant to subdivision f of this section, and a list and brief
description of each such project, including but not limited to square
footage, project cost and the reason for such exemption, disaggregated by
city agency.



(Am. L.L. 2016/031, 3/28/2016; Am. L.L. 2016/032, 3/28/2016; Am. L.L.
2017/097, 5/30/2017, eff. 6/29/2017)



Section 224.2. Required energy conservation projects in city buildings.



   a.   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the terms "base
building systems", "city building", "energy audit", "energy efficiency
report", and "simple payback" shall have the same meanings as defined in
section 28-308.1 of the administrative code.



   b.   No later than one year after the submission, in accordance with
article three hundred eight of chapter three of title twenty-eight of the
administrative code, of an energy efficiency report for a city building,
reasonable capital improvements to the building's base building systems that
are recommended in the building's energy audit shall be completed, including,
at a minimum, all those improvements of the base building systems having a
simple payback of not more than seven years or capital improvements that,
when combined, would equal or exceed the overall reduction in energy
consumption of such recommended capital improvements having a simple payback
of not more than seven years.



   c.   The mayor shall promulgate rules as may be necessary to carry
out the provisions of this section.



Section 224.3. Induction loop systems.



   a.   As used in this section, the following terms have the following
meanings:



      Assembly area. The term “assembly area” means an assembly
area, as defined in section 106.5 of the 2010 Americans with Disabilities Act
standards for accessible design, in which audible communication is integral
to the use of the space, except that such term shall not include classrooms
in schools; facilities primarily used to deploy first responders, courthouses
and outdoor facilities such as athletic fields and stadiums.



      Baseline construction cost. The term "baseline construction cost"
means the total cost of a proposed capital project not including the cost of
installing an assistive listening system.



      Capital project. The term "capital project" means a capital
project as defined in section 210 of this chapter that is paid for in whole
or in part from the city treasury.



   b.   Each capital project with an estimated baseline construction
cost of $950,000 or more involving the construction or reconstruction of one
or more assembly areas shall be designed and constructed to include in at
least one assembly area the installation of an induction loop assistive
listening system that complies with section N102 of appendix N of the New
York city building code, or an alternative assistive listening system that
complies with appendix N of the New York city building code that has been
determined by the mayor in accordance with subdivision i of this section to
be significantly more effective for the hard of hearing than an induction
loop system. Each security, information, or reception desk used for the
checking-in or screening of persons attending a meeting or event held in a
looped assembly area shall be equipped with microloops. This section shall
not apply to a capital project involving the reconstruction of an assembly
area if the estimated cost of installing an induction loop system or
alternative system exceeds 5% of the baseline construction cost of the
project.



   c.   Directional signage that includes guidance to an assistive
listening assembly area, including raised graphics and letters with Braille
descriptors, must be provided in accordance with section 1110.2 of the New
York city building code, and other signage indicating any special
accessibility features must be provided in accordance with section 1110.3 of
such code.



   d.   The entrance to any building containing an assistive listening
assembly area and any security, information, or reception area used for the
checking-in or screening of persons attending a meeting or event held in such
assembly area shall display the international symbol of access for hearing
loss pursuant to figure 703.6.3.3 of ICC A117.1 - 2009 and a “T” in the
lower right-hand corner of such symbol indicating the availability of an
induction loop system or a symbol indicating an alternative system if
applicable.



   e.   No later than July 1, 2018, the mayor or an office or agency
designated by the mayor shall post on its website the locations of facilities
owned or operated by the city at which an assistive listening system such as
an induction loop, infrared, FM, or other type of system, is permanently
available or in the process of being installed, as well as which type of
assistive listening system is permanently available or in the process of
being installed, including the cost associated with installation of new
assistive listening systems. The list shall be updated annually thereafter.



   f.   This section shall not apply to capital projects involving the
construction or reconstruction of assembly areas that are not owned by the
city unless 50 percent or more of the estimated cost of such project is to be
paid for out of the city treasury, provided that this exemption shall not
apply to any capital project that receives $1,000,000 or more out of the city
treasury.



   g.   The mayor may exempt from this section projects accounting for
up to 20% of the capital dollars in each fiscal year subject to this section
for the installation of assistive listening systems if in his or her sole
judgment such exemption is necessary in the public interest. At the
conclusion of each fiscal year the mayor shall report to the council the
exemptions granted pursuant to this section, including the basis for such
exemption.



   h.   The mayor or an office or agency designated by the mayor shall
promulgate rules to carry out the provisions of this section.



   i.   Where the mayor determines, after consulting with experts in
the field of hearing disabilities and assistive listening systems and
advocates for people who are hard of hearing, that there is new technology
with respect to an assistive listening system that makes such system
significantly more effective than an induction loop system, the mayor may
promulgate a rule allowing the use of such system as an alternative to an
induction loop system in accordance with subdivision b.



(L.L. 2017/051, 3/21/2017, eff 1/2/2018)



Editor's note: L.L. 2017/051, 3/21/2017, eff. 1/1/2018, § 2 provides: "This
local law takes effect on January 1, 2018, and applies to projects for which
an application for construction document approval is filed with the
department of buildings on and after such date, except that prior to such
effective date the mayor or office or agency designated by the mayor shall
take all actions necessary for the timely implementation of this local law,
including the promulgation of rules."



Chapter 10: Budget Process



Section 225. Budgetary responsibilities of the mayor, the director of
management and budget and the comptroller.



   a.   The mayor shall each year, in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter, prepare and submit to the council a preliminary budget and an
executive budget each of which shall present a complete financial plan for
the city and its agencies for the ensuing fiscal year, setting forth proposed
operating and capital expenditures, proposed interfund transfers, anticipated
revenues and any other anticipated sources and uses of funds. Each such
budget shall consist of three parts: the expense budget, which shall set
forth proposed appropriations for the operating expenses of the city
including debt service; the capital budget and program, which shall set forth
proposed appropriations for capital projects for the ensuing fiscal year and
the three succeeding fiscal years; and the revenue budget, which shall set
forth the estimated revenues and receipts of the city.



   b.   There shall be an office of management and budget in the
executive office of the mayor, the head of which shall be director of
management and budget who shall be appointed by the mayor. It shall be the
duty of the director to perform all such duties in regard to the budget and
related matters as the mayor may direct. The director of management and
budget shall have the power, personally or through representatives, to survey
each agency for the purpose of ascertaining its budgetary requirements. The
director may require any agency, or any officer or employee, to furnish data
and information and to answer inquiries pertinent to the exercise of any of
the director's duties in regard to the budget and related matters.



   c.   The comptroller shall produce timely analyses of the
preliminary and executive budgets including evaluations of the
recommendations of the borough presidents, as well as those of the mayor, and
of the assumptions and methodologies used by the mayor in making the revenue
estimates contained in such budgets.



Section 225-a. Citywide participatory budgeting.



The mayor shall, consistent with this charter and other applicable law,
establish a program to be implemented no later than the fiscal year beginning
on July 1, 2020, to promote the participation of residents in identifying and
expressing preferences among recommendations for local projects in their
communities, and shall consider such projects for inclusion in the executive
budget. The council, borough presidents, community boards, and city agencies
shall, to the extent practicable, coordinate with the mayor and the civic
engagement commission in implementing such program established pursuant to
this section and section 3202.



(L.L. 2018/211, 12/3/2018, eff. 4/1/2019)



Section 226. Fiscal year.



   The fiscal year of the city shall commence on the first day of July in
each year and shall terminate at midnight on the ensuing thirtieth day of
June.



Section 227. Spending pursuant to appropriations.



   a.   No money, except for grants or gifts from private entities,
shall be paid from any fund under the management of the city, or any fund
under the management of any agency or officer of the city, or any other
entity the majority of the members of whose board are city officials or are
appointed directly or indirectly by city officials, except in pursuance of an
appropriation by the council or other specific legal authorization; provided,
however, that



      (1)   if at any time the council shall fail to make an
appropriation for the payment of debt service on any debts of the city as
they fall due, or for the payments to the several sinking funds, the
commissioner of finance shall set apart, from the first revenues thereafter
received applicable to the general fund of the city, a sum sufficient to pay
such amounts and shall so apply such sum; and



      (2)   money, the ownership and equitable title of which
belongs to an individual, corporation, organization or government other than
the city and which is being held by any agency or officer of the city pending
transfer of such money to such individual, corporation, organization or
government in accordance with the terms and conditions pursuant to which it
was placed in the custody of such agency or officer, may be transferred to
such individual, corporation, organization or government by such agency or
officer without an appropriation by law, provided such transfers are made in
accordance with such terms and conditions; and



      (3)   money or other financial resources may only be
transferred from one fund to another without specific statutory authorization
for such a transfer if that money or those other financial resources are
being loaned temporarily to such other fund and an accurate accounting and
reporting of the balance of financial resources in each fund and of the
amount due by each fund to each other fund is made at the end of each month;
and



      (4)   grants or gifts from private entities exempt from the
requirements of this section, and expenditures of such funds, shall be
subject to disclosure, at least annually, by the responsible agency, officer
or entity in a form and containing such information as the mayor shall
prescribe for this purpose by rule.



   b.   The head of each agency of the city, and each entity the
majority of the members of whose board are city officials or individuals
appointed directly or indirectly by city officials, shall, on or before the
fifteenth day of October in each year, submit to the mayor and the council,
in such form as the mayor shall prescribe, a statement of the sources,
amounts and disposition of all money received by such agency or entity, or by
a unit or officer of such agency during the preceding fiscal year, other than
(i) money appropriated for the use of such agency or entity by the council,
or (ii) money paid by such agency or entity into the city treasury and
reported in the annual report of the comptroller for such fiscal year. The
mayor shall ensure that copies of such statements are available for public
inspection, and shall designate a city officer to maintain copies of such
statements for such purpose.



Section 228. Draft ten-year capital strategy.



   Not later than the first day of November in each even-numbered year,
the director of management and budget and the director of city planning shall
jointly submit to the mayor, the council, the borough presidents and the city
planning commission a draft ten-year capital strategy prepared in accordance
with the provisions of section two hundred fifteen.



Section 229. Revenue reports of the comptroller and mayor.



   a.   Not later than the first day of November, the comptroller shall
certify to the mayor the actual revenues for the previous fiscal year.



   b.   Not later than the fifteenth day of November, the mayor shall
issue a report comparing actual revenues to estimated revenues in the budget
as adopted for the previous fiscal year, accompanied by a detailed listing
and an explanation of any variances between actual revenues and estimated
revenues. This report shall be published in the City Record.



Section 230. Community board budget priorities.



   a.   Not later than thirty days prior to the date set by the mayor
in accordance with section two hundred thirty-one for the submission of
departmental estimates, each community board shall submit to the mayor and
the appropriate borough president a statement of its expense budget
priorities and a statement of its capital budget priorities for the ensuing
fiscal year, in such form and containing such information as the mayor shall
prescribe. The form prescribed by the mayor shall include (i) a method by
which continuing support may be expressed by a community board for existing
programs and capital projects and (ii) reasonable limitations on the total
number of expense and capital budget priorities which a community board may
propose. The mayor shall provide each community board with reasonable notice
of the date set for the submission of such priorities. The mayor shall ensure
that representatives of each agency that delivers local services, or is
responsible for capital projects, within any community district shall be
available for consultation with the community board for such community
district in the preparation of its statement of budget priorities.



   b.   Each community board in the preparation of its statement of
budget priorities, shall, upon adequate public notice, hold a public hearing
at which residents of the community district and other interested individuals
may express their opinions as to the service and capital needs of the
district.



   c.   Copies of each statement of budget priorities shall be provided
expeditiously by the mayor to the city planning commission and the head of
each agency affected.



Section 231. Departmental estimates.



   a.   Not later than such date as the mayor may direct, the head of
each agency shall submit to the mayor, in such form and containing such
information as the mayor shall require, a detailed estimate of the expense
budget requirements of such agency for the ensuing fiscal year and capital
budget and program requirements for the ensuing fiscal year and three
succeeding fiscal years, prepared in accordance with the provisions of
section one hundred and section two hundred twelve, respectively, and a
detailed estimate of all receipts, from sources other than taxes, which the
agency anticipates collecting during the ensuing fiscal year. Such estimates
shall be known collectively as departmental estimates and shall be known
respectively as expense budget departmental estimates, capital budget and
program departmental estimates and revenue budget departmental estimates.
Copies of such departmental estimates shall be provided expeditiously by the
mayor to each borough president.



   b.   In the preparation of such departmental estimates, the head of
each agency that delivers local services, or is responsible for capital
projects, within any community district shall (1) consult with the community
board for such community district through appropriate officers and employees
of the agency, and (2) consider the community board statements of expense and
capital budget priorities submitted in accordance with section two hundred
thirty of this chapter.



Section 232. Report of the comptroller on capital debt and obligations.



   Not later than the first day of December, the comptroller shall submit
to the mayor, the council and the city planning commission a report, which
shall be published forthwith in the City Record, setting forth the amount and
nature of all obligations authorized on account of each pending capital
project and the liabilities incurred for each such project outstanding on the
first day of July and setting forth and commenting in detail upon the city's
financial condition and advising as to the maximum amount and nature of debt
and reserves which in the comptroller's opinion the city may soundly incur
for capital projects during each of the four succeeding fiscal years, and
containing such other information relevant to this subject as may be required
by local law, by the mayor by executive order, or which the comptroller deems
necessary and relevant.



Section 233. Report of the comptroller on the state of the city's finances.



   Not later than the fifteenth day of December, the comptroller shall
report to the council, at a stated meeting of the council, on the state of
the city's economy and finances, including evaluations of the city's
financial plan, as most recently updated by the mayor in accordance with
section two hundred fifty-eight, and the assumptions on which the revenue and
expenditure forecasts contained therein are based.



Section 234. City planning commission hearing and statement on the draft
ten-year capital strategy.



   Not later than the sixteenth day of January in each odd numbered year,
the city planning commission shall submit to the mayor, the borough
presidents and the council a report containing its comments on the draft
ten-year capital strategy submitted in accordance with section two hundred
twenty-eight of this chapter, including such recommendations as it deems
appropriate. The city planning commission, in the preparation of such report,
shall, upon adequate public notice, hold a public hearing at which interested
organizations and individuals may express their opinions regarding the draft
ten-year capital strategy.



Section 235. Preliminary certificate of the mayor on capital debt and
obligations.



   No later than the sixteenth day of January, the mayor shall submit to
the council, the comptroller, the borough presidents and the city planning
commission and publish a preliminary certificate setting forth the maximum
amount of debt and reserves which, in the mayor's opinion, the city may
soundly incur for capital projects during the ensuing fiscal year and during
each of the following three fiscal years, and the maximum amount of
appropriations and expenditures for capital projects which the city, given
such maximum amount of debt and reserves, may soundly make during each such
fiscal year. At any time up to the submission of the executive capital budget
to the council, the mayor may amend such preliminary certificate. Any such
amendments shall be submitted to the council, the comptroller, the borough
presidents and the city planning commission, and published forthwith in the
City Record.



Section 236. Submission of the preliminary budget.



   Not later than the sixteenth day of January, the mayor shall submit to
the council and publish a preliminary budget for the ensuing fiscal year.
Copies of such budget shall be provided to the council, borough presidents,
each community board and borough board, the city planning commission, and the
department of city planning. A copy of such preliminary budget shall also be
provided to the council not later than the sixteenth day of January in both a
human-readable format or spreadsheet and in a non-proprietary format or
spreadsheet that permits automated processing and renders such data capable
of being downloaded in bulk or any other format mutually agreed upon between
the mayor and the council.



(Am. L.L. 2017/218, 12/1/2017)



Section 237. Report of independent budget office on revenues and expenditures.



   On or before the first day of February, the director of the independent
budget office shall publish a report, for the ensuing fiscal year, with
respect to expected levels of revenues and expenditures, taking into account
projected economic factors and the proposals contained in the preliminary
budget submitted by the mayor for such fiscal year. Such report shall also
include a discussion of city budget priorities, including alternative ways of
allocating the total amount of appropriations, expenditures and commitments
for such fiscal year among major programs or functional categories taking
into account how such alternative allocations will meet major city needs and
effect balanced growth and development in the city.



Section 238. Community board review of preliminary budget.



   Not later than the fifteenth day of February, each community board
shall submit to the mayor, the council, director of management and budget,
the appropriate borough president and each member of the borough board of the
borough in which the community board is located, a statement containing the
community board's assessment of the responsiveness of the preliminary budget
to its statement of budget priorities submitted pursuant to section two
hundred thirty and any other comments or recommendations which it wishes to
make in regard to the preliminary budget.



Section 239. Estimate of assessed valuation, and statement of taxes due and
uncollected by the commissioner of finance.



   Not later than the fifteenth day of February, the commissioner of
finance shall submit to the mayor and to the council:



   a.   a tentative estimate of the assessed valuation of real property
subject to taxation for the ensuing fiscal year, which shall be published
forthwith in the City Record; and



   b.   a certified statement showing as of a specified date the amount
of all real property taxes due, the amount expected to be received and the
amount actually uncollected by such categories and classifications as will
facilitate understanding of such information.



Section 240. Tax Benefit Report.



   Not later than the fifteenth day of February the mayor shall submit to
the council a tax benefit report which shall include:



      a.   a listing of all exclusions, exemptions, abatements,
credits or other benefits allowed against city tax liability, against the
base or the rate of, or the amount due pursuant to, each city tax, provided
however that such listing need not include any benefits which are applicable
without any city action to such city tax because they are available in regard
to a federal or state tax on which such city tax is based; and



      b.   a description of each tax benefit included in such
listing, providing the following information:



         1.   the legal authority for such tax benefit;



         2.   the objectives of, and eligibility requirements
for, such tax benefit;



         3.   such data and supporting documentation as are
available and meaningful regarding the number and kind of taxpayers using
benefits pursuant to such tax benefit and the total amount of benefits used
pursuant to such tax benefit, by taxable and/or fiscal year;



         4.   for each tax benefit pursuant to which a taxpayer
is allowed to claim benefits in one year and carry them over for use in one
or more later years, the number and kind of taxpayers carrying forward
benefits pursuant to such tax benefit and the total amount of benefits
carried forward, by taxable and/or fiscal year;



         5.   for nineteen hundred ninety and each year
thereafter for which the information required by paragraphs three and four
are not available, the reasons therefor, the steps being taken to provide
such information as soon as possible, and the first year for which such
information will be    available;



         6.   such data and supporting documentation as are
available and meaningful regarding the economic and social impact and other
consequences of such tax benefit; and



         7.   a listing and summary of all evaluations and audits
of such tax benefit issued during the previous two years.



Section 241. Borough board preliminary budget hearings.



   Not later than the twenty-fifth day of February each borough board
shall submit a comprehensive statement on the budget priorities of the
borough to the mayor, council, and director of management and budget. Each
borough board, in the preparation of this statement, shall, upon adequate
public notice, hold one or more public hearings on the preliminary budget, to
obtain the views and recommendations of the community boards within the
borough, residents of the borough and others with substantial interests in
the borough, on the proposals contained in the preliminary budget and on the
capital and service needs of the borough. Officers of agencies, when
requested by the borough board, shall appear and be heard.



Section 242. Statement of debt service by the comptroller.



   Not later than the first day of March, the comptroller shall submit to
the mayor and to the council a certified statement which shall be published
forthwith in the City Record and which shall contain a schedule of the
appropriations required during the ensuing fiscal year for debt service,
including appropriations to the several sinking funds as required by law, and
such other information as may be required by law.



Section 243. The operating budget of the council.



   Not later than the tenth day of March, the council shall approve and
submit to the mayor detailed itemized estimates of the financial needs of the
council for the ensuing fiscal year. Such estimates shall be comprised of at
least one personal service unit of appropriation and at least one other than
personal service unit of appropriation for each standing committee of the
council and for each organizational unit established pursuant to section
forty-five of this charter. The mayor shall include such estimates in the
executive budget without revision, but with such recommendations as the mayor
may deem proper.



Section 244. Preparation of the executive budget.



   In preparing the executive budget to be submitted in accordance with
section two hundred forty-nine, the mayor shall consult with the borough
presidents.



Section 245. Borough president recommendations to the mayor.



   a.   Not later than the tenth day of March, each borough president
shall submit to the mayor and council, in such form and containing such
information as the mayor shall prescribe, any proposed modifications of the
preliminary budget which the borough president recommends in accordance with
the provisions of subdivision b of this section.



   b.   Each borough president shall propose such modifications to the
preliminary budget as the borough president deems to be in the best interest
of the borough, taking into consideration community and borough board
priorities and testimony received at public hearings held pursuant to section
two hundred forty-one. The net effects of any such modifications recommended
by the borough president may not result in an increase in the total amount of
appropriations proposed in the preliminary budget. If increases in
appropriations within the borough are recommended, offsetting reductions in
other appropriations within the borough must also be recommended. Each
proposed increase or reduction must be stated separately and distinctly and
refer each to a single object or purpose.



Section 246. Report of independent budget office on preliminary budget.



   On or before the fifteenth day of March, the director of the
independent budget office shall publish a report analyzing the preliminary
budget for the ensuing fiscal year.



Section 247. Council preliminary budget hearings and recommendations.



   a.   Not later than the twenty-fifth day of March, the council,
through its committees, shall hold hearings on the program objectives and
fiscal implications of the preliminary budget, the statements of budget
priorities of the community boards and borough boards, the draft ten-year
capital strategy and the report of the city planning commission on such
strategy, the borough presidents recommendations submitted pursuant to
section two hundred forty-five to the extent that such recommendations are
available at the time of these hearings, and the status of capital projects
and expense appropriations previously authorized. The public and
representatives of community boards and borough boards may attend and be
heard in regard to all such matters. Representatives of the director of
management and budget and the director of city planning may attend the
hearings and ask questions. Officials of agencies, when requested by the
committees of the council, shall appear and be heard.



   b.   Findings and recommendations of the council, or its committees,
including recommendations for any changes in the unit of appropriation
structure which the council deems appropriate, shall be submitted to the
mayor and published not later than the twenty-fifth day of March. The net
effect of the changes recommended by the council in the preliminary capital
budget shall not result in a capital budget which exceeds the maximum amount
set forth in the preliminary certificate issued pursuant to section two
hundred thirty-five of this charter.



Section 248. Ten-year capital strategy.



   Not later than the twenty-sixth day of April in each odd-numbered year,
the mayor shall issue and publish a ten-year capital strategy, prepared in
accordance with the provisions of section two hundred fifteen of this chapter.



Section 249. Submission of the executive budget.



   a.   Not later than the twenty-sixth day of April, the mayor shall
submit to the council (1) a proposed executive budget for the ensuing fiscal
year, and (2) a budget message, both of which, along with any accompanying
reports and schedules, shall be printed forthwith. Copies of such proposed
executive budget, budget message and any accompanying reports and schedules
shall also be provided to the council not later than the twenty-sixth day of
April in both a human-readable format or spreadsheet and in a non-proprietary
format or spreadsheet that permits automated processing and renders such data
capable of being downloaded in bulk or any other format mutually agreed upon
between the mayor and the council.



   b.   As soon after the submission of the executive budget as is
practicable, the mayor shall submit to the council copies of all proposed
local laws and all proposed home rule requests necessary to implement the
recommendations made in the executive budget.



   c.   Adjustment of expense budget borough allocation. If the
executive expense budget submitted by the mayor in accordance with this
section includes an expense budget borough allocation which is greater or
less than the expense budget borough allocation certified by the mayor to the
borough presidents in accordance with subdivision d of section one hundred
two, the mayor shall, concomitantly with the submission of the executive
expense budget, notify each borough president of the difference between such
amounts and of the portion of such difference allocable to each borough
pursuant to the provisions of section one hundred two. Within seven days of
receiving such notification, each borough president shall submit to the mayor
and the council, in such form as the mayor shall prescribe, proposed
additional appropriations or proposed reductions in appropriations equaling
such portion of such difference.



   d.   Adjustments of capital budget borough allocations. If the
executive capital budget submitted by the mayor in accordance with this
section includes a capital budget borough allocation which is greater or less
than the capital budget borough allocation certified by the mayor to the
borough presidents in accordance with subdivision c of section two hundred
eleven the mayor shall, concomitantly with the submission of such executive
capital budget, notify each borough president of the difference between such
amounts and of the portion of such difference allocable to each borough
pursuant to the provisions of subdivision a of section two hundred eleven.
Within seven days of receiving such notification, each borough president
shall submit to the mayor and the council, in such form as the mayor shall
prescribe, proposed additional appropriations or proposed reductions in
appropriations equaling such portion of such difference.



(Am. L.L. 2017/218, 12/1/2017)



Section 250. The budget message.



   The budget message, which shall not be deemed a part of the budget,
shall include:



      1.   An explanation, in summary terms, of the major programs,
projects, emphases and objectives of the budget, the general fiscal and
economic condition of the city, the tax and fiscal base of the city, and
intergovernmental fiscal relations.



      2.   Itemized information and supporting schedules of
positions, salaries and other than personal service expenses, anticipated for
the ensuing fiscal year.



      3.   Recommendations for any changes in the revenue sources
and fiscal operations of the city, including intergovernmental revenue and
fiscal arrange- ments.



      4.   An itemized statement of the actual revenues and receipts
and accruals of the general fund and of all other revenue sources, including
state and federal aid and revenues for specified purposes, for each of the
four preceding fiscal years, and for the first eight months of the current
fiscal year, and the estimated amount of such items for the balance of the
current fiscal year, and for the ensuing fiscal year. In preparing such
information the mayor shall consult with the comptroller.



      5.   A listing of the sources and amounts of all revenues and
other monies of a nonrecurring nature that are being proposed to be utilized
during the ensuing fiscal year and that are not expected to be available or
used in subsequent fiscal years.



      6.   An update of the four-year financial plan, as set forth
in section two hundred fifty-eight of this chapter, containing, (a) for each
agency, for all existing programs, forecasts of expenditures for the ensuing
fiscal year and the succeeding three fiscal years at existing levels of
service; (b) forecasts of revenue by source from existing sources of revenue
for the ensuing fiscal year and the succeeding three fiscal years; and (c)
for each new or expanded program, an indication of when such program is
projected to be fully implemented and a forecast of the annual recurring
costs for such program or program expansion after it is fully implemented.



      7.   For each agency, a comparison of the proposed
appropriations for the ensuing fiscal year with (i) the amounts appropriated
in the current expense budget as originally adopted and as modified through
the first eight months of the current fiscal year, (ii) the amounts actually
expended in the previous fiscal year and (iii) the amounts actually expended
through the first eight months of the current fiscal year and the estimated
expenditures for the balance of the current fiscal year.



      8.   For each agency that has local service districts within
community districts and boroughs, a statement of proposed direct expenditures
in each service district for each unit of appropriation and a statement of
the basis for the allocation of direct expenditures to local service
districts of each such agency.



      9.   An explanation of principal changes in performance goals
and indicators from the date of submission of the preliminary management
report to the submission of the proposed executive budget.



      10.   An itemized statement, covering the city's entire
capital plant, except for those portions of the capital plant which have been
committed to the care and control of the board of education or officers or
employees thereof, by agency and project type and, within project type, by
personal services and other than personal services, of the amounts
appropriated for maintenance of such capital plant in the previous and
current fiscal years as originally adopted and as modified through the first
eight months of the current fiscal year, and of the amounts actually expended
for such maintenance in the previous fiscal year and through the first eight
months of the current fiscal year and the amounts estimated to be expended
for such purpose during the balance of the current fiscal year; and, for each
agency, an explanation of the substantive differences, if any, between the
amounts actually expended for such maintenance in the previous fiscal year or
projected to be expended for such purpose in the current fiscal year and the
amounts originally appropriated for such purpose for such years.



      11.   A presentation of the maintenance activities proposed by
the mayor to be completed during the ensuing fiscal year for all major
portions of the capital plant, as such terms are defined in subdivision a of
section eleven hundred ten-a, categorized by agency and project type; an
explanation of the differences, if any, between such proposed activities and
the activities scheduled to be undertaken during such fiscal year pursuant to
subdivision c of such section; an explanation of the differences, if any,
between the proposed appropriations for such activities and the estimates of
the amounts submitted, pursuant to subdivision f of such section, as
necessary to maintain such portions of the capital plant; and a presentation
and explanation of the differences, if any, between the maintenance
activities for all major portions of the capital plant proposed by the mayor,
in the budget message for the previous fiscal year, to be completed during
such fiscal year and the activities actually completed during such fiscal
year.



      12.   A statement of the extent to which the executive budget
incorporates the revisions to the preliminary budget suggested by the borough
presidents, in accordance with subdivision a of section two hundred
forty-five and the reasons why any other suggested revisions were not
incorporated in the executive budget.



      13.   A statement of the modifications, if any, which the
mayor recommends that the council make in the appropriations submitted by the
borough presidents pursuant to sections one hundred two and two hundred
eleven.



      14.   A statement of any substantive changes in the
methodology and assumptions used to determine the revenue estimates presented
pursuant to subdivisions four, five and six of this section from the
methodology and assumptions presented in the preliminary budget.



      15.   A statement of the implications for the orderly
development of the city, its community districts and boroughs of the capital
projects included in or contemplated by the capital budget and program.



      16.   A certificate setting forth the maximum amount of debt
and reserves which, in the mayor's opinion, the city may soundly incur for
capital projects during the ensuing fiscal year and during each of the
following three fiscal years, and the maximum amount of appropriations and
expenditures for capital projects which the city, given such maximum amount
of debt and reserves, may soundly make during each such fiscal year.



Section 251. Borough president recommendations on the executive budget.



   Not later than the sixth day of May, each borough president shall
submit to the mayor and the council a response to the mayor's executive
budget. Such response shall indicate which of the recommended appropriations
submitted by the borough president pursuant to section two hundred
forty-five, which were not included by the mayor in the executive budget,
should be considered by the council for inclusion in the budget. Any
appropriations recommended in this manner for inclusion in the budget shall
be accompanied by recommendations for offsetting reductions in other
appropriations within the borough. Any such increases or reductions must be
stated separately and distinctly and refer each to a single object or purpose.



Section 252. Report of independent budget office on executive budget.



   On or before the fifteenth day of May, the director of the independent
budget office shall publish a report analyzing the executive budget for the
ensuing fiscal year.



Section 253. Executive budget hearings.



   Between the sixth day of May and the twenty-fifth day of May, the
council shall hold public hearings on the budget as presented by the mayor.
The council may hold such hearings either as a body or by its finance
committee or other committees. Officers of agencies and representatives of
community boards and borough boards shall have the right, and it shall be
their duty when requested by the council, to appear and be heard in regard to
the executive budget and to the capital and service needs of the communities,
boroughs and the city.



Section 254. Amendment and adoption of the executive budget.



   a.   The council may not alter the budget as submitted by the mayor
pursuant to section two hundred forty-nine except to increase, decrease, add
or omit any unit of appropriation for personal service or other than personal
service or any appropriation for any capital project or add, omit or change
any terms or conditions related to any or all such appropriations; provided,
however, that each increase or addition must be stated separately and
distinctly from any items of the budget and refer each to a single object or
purpose; and, provided, further, that the aggregate amount appropriated for
capital projects shall not exceed the maximum amount of appropriations
contained in the mayor's certificate issued pursuant to subdivision sixteen
of section two hundred fifty.



   b.   The council shall consider, and act upon, all recommendations
made by the borough presidents pursuant to section two hundred fifty-one of
this chapter and all recommendations made by the mayor pursuant to paragraph
thirteen of section two hundred fifty of this chapter.



   c.   The budget when adopted by the council shall become effective
immediately without further action by the mayor, except that appropriations
for the council or appropriations added to the mayor's executive budget by
the council or any changes in terms and conditions, shall be subject to the
veto of the mayor.



   d.   If an expense budget has not been adopted by the fifth day of
June pursuant to subdivisions a and b of this section, the expense budget and
tax rate adopted as modified for the current fiscal year shall be deemed to
have been extended for the new fiscal year until such time as a new expense
budget has been adopted.



   e.   If a capital budget and a capital program have not been adopted
by the fifth day of June pursuant to subdivisions a and b of this section,
the unutilized portion of all prior capital appropriations shall be deemed
reappropriated.



Section 255. Veto of the mayor.



   a.   The mayor, not later than the fifth day after the council has
acted upon the budget or capital program submitted with the executive budget,
may disapprove any increase or addition to the budget, any unit of
appropriation, or any change in any term or condition of the budget. The
mayor, by such date, may also disapprove any item or term or condition
included in such budget pursuant to the provisions of section two hundred
forty-three of this chapter. The mayor shall return the budget by that date
to the council, setting forth objections in writing.



   b.   The council, by a two-thirds vote of all the council members,
may override any disapproval by the mayor pursuant to subdivision a of this
section; provided, however, that if no such action by the council is taken
within ten days of such disapproval, the expense budget to which such
disapprovals relate shall be deemed adopted as modified by the disapprovals
by the mayor.



Section 256. Appropriation, certification and publication.



   Not later than the day after the budget is finally adopted, the budget
as finally adopted in such year shall be certified by the mayor, the
comptroller and the city clerk as the budget for the ensuing fiscal year, and
the several amounts therein specified as appropriations or units of
appropriation shall be and become appropriated to the several purposes
therein named, whether payable from the tax levy or otherwise and subject to
the terms and conditions of the budget. The budget shall thereupon be filed
in the offices of the comptroller and the city clerk, and shall be published
forthwith. When finally adopted in accordance with sections two hundred
fifty-four and two hundred fifty-five, such budget as adopted and as modified
during the fiscal year in accordance with sections one hundred seven and two
hundred sixteen shall have the force of law.



Section 257. Comparison of adopted budget and ten-year capital strategy.



   Not later than thirty days after the budget is finally adopted, the
mayor shall prepare a statement of how the capital budget and program as
finally adopted vary, if at all, from the ten-year capital strategy,
submitted pursuant to section two hundred forty-eight. Such statement shall
be published as an appendix to the ten year capital strategy.



Section 258. Standards for budget and financial plan.



   a.   The operations of the city shall be such that, at the end of
the fiscal year, the results thereof shall not show a deficit when reported
in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. The mayor shall
take all actions necessary in accordance with the provisions of the charter,
including but not limited to section one hundred six, or other applicable law
to ensure that the city is in compliance with this subdivision.



   b.   Pursuant to the procedures contained in subdivision c of this
section, each year the mayor shall develop, and from time to time modify, a
four year financial plan. Each such financial plan and financial plan
modification shall comply with the requirements of subdivision d of this
section and shall conform to the following standards:



      (1)   For each fiscal year, the city's budget covering all
expenditures other than capital items shall be prepared and balanced so that
the results thereof would not show a deficit when reported in accordance with
generally accepted accounting principles and would permit comparison of the
budget with the report of actual financial results prepared in accordance
with generally accepted accounting principles.



      (2)   The city shall issue no obligations which shall be
inconsistent with the financial plan prepared in accordance with this section.



      (3)   Provision shall be made for the payment in full of the
debt service on all bonds and notes of the city and for the adequate funding
of programs of the city which are mandated by state or federal law and for
which obligations are going to be incurred during the fiscal year.



      (4)   All projections of revenues and expenditures contained
in the financial plan shall be based on reasonable and appropriate
assumptions and methods of estimation. All cash flow projections shall be
based upon reasonable and appropriate assumptions as to sources and uses of
cash (including but not limited to the timing thereof), and shall provide for
operations of the city to be conducted within the cash resources so projected.



      (5)   A general reserve shall be provided for each fiscal year
to cover potential reductions in projected revenues or increases in projected
expenditures during each such fiscal year. The amount provided for such
general reserve shall be estimated in accordance with paragraph four of this
subdivision, but in no event shall it be less than one hundred million
dollars at the beginning of any fiscal year.



      (6)   In the event that the results of the city's operations
during the preceding fiscal year have not comported with subdivision a of
this section, the first fiscal year included in any financial plan shall make
provision for the repayment of any deficit incurred by the city during the
preceding fiscal year.



   c.   The financial plan shall be developed and may from time to time
be modified, in accordance with the following procedures:



      (1)   The mayor shall, in conjuction with the preliminary
budget prepared pursuant to section one hundred one, prepare a financial plan
covering the four ensuing fiscal years (the first year of which is the year
for which such preliminary budget is being prepared) as well as updating the
current fiscal year.



      (2)   After the preparation by the mayor of a financial plan
in accordance with the preceding paragraph, the mayor shall reexamine, at
least on a quarterly basis, the projections of revenues and expenditures and
other estimates contained in the financial plan, and shall prepare
modifications in accordance with the following procedures:



         (a)   The budget message, issued pursuant to section two
hundred fifty of this chapter, shall include an update of the financial plan
covering the four ensuing fiscal years (the first year of which is the year
for which such budget message is being prepared) as well as an update for the
current fiscal year.



         (b)   Not later than thirty days after the budget is
finally adopted, the mayor shall issue an update of the financial plan
covering the four ensuing fiscal years (the first year of which shall be the
year for which such budget has been adopted) as well as an update for the
fiscal year that is ending or has just ended. Such update shall reflect
changes which were made in the budget in accordance with sections two hundred
fifty-four and two hundred fifty-five; provided, however, that the budget
adopted in accordance with such sections shall be consistent with the
standards applicable to the financial plan set forth in this section.



         (c)   During the second quarter of the fiscal year, the
mayor shall issue an update of the financial plan covering the fiscal year in
which such quarter occurs and the three ensuing fiscal years.



         (d)   In addition, on such schedule as the mayor deems
appropriate, the mayor may issue further updates of the financial plan during
the fiscal year.



   d.   The financial plan shall include projections of all revenues,
expenditures and cash flows (including but not limited to projected capital
expenditures and debt issuances) and a schedule of projected capital
commitments of the city. In addition, each financial plan and financial plan
modification shall include a statement of the significant assumptions and
methods of estimation used in arriving at the projections contained therein.



   e.   Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of this charter, in
the event of any change in generally accepted accounting principles, or
change in the application of generally accepted accounting principles to the
city, if the mayor determines that immediate compliance with such change will
have a material effect on the city's budget over a time period insufficient
to accommodate the effect without a substantial adverse impact on the
delivery of essential services, the mayor may authorize and approve a method
of phasing the requirements of such change into the budget over such
reasonably expeditious time period as the mayor deems appropriate.



   f.   The powers, duties, and obligations set forth in this section
shall be subject to the powers, duties, and obligations placed upon any state
or local officer or agency, including but not limited to the New York state
financial control board, by or pursuant to the New York State Financial
Emergency Act for the City of New York, while such act remains in effect.



§ 258.1. Documents to be made available in certain formats.



   The office of management and budget shall, no later than ten days
following the time it posts on its website any budget document, including,
but not limited to, such documents as are required by chapters six, nine or
ten of this charter or the financial emergency act for the city of New York,
post data, as such term is defined in subdivision b of section 23-501,
contained in such documents on its website and on the single web portal
created pursuant to section 23-502 in a non-proprietary format or spreadsheet
that permits automated processing and renders such data capable of being
downloaded in bulk, such as those formats that are consistent with the
standards established by the secretary of the treasury and the director of
the office of management and budget pursuant to section 4 of the digital
accountability and transparency act of 2014, as enacted by public law 113-101.



(L.L. 2017/218, 12/1/2017)



Chapter 11: Independent Budget office



Section 259. Independent budget office.



   a.   There shall be an independent budget office to be headed by a
director who shall be appointed upon the recommendation of the independent
budget office advisory board, by a special committee convened for this
purpose. Such committee shall consist of the comptroller, the public
advocate, a borough president chosen by the borough presidents, and a council
member chosen by the council, and shall act by majority vote. The director
shall be appointed without regard to political affiliation and solely on the
basis of fitness to perform the duties assigned by this chapter. The term of
office of the director first appointed shall expire on August first, two
thousand, and the terms of office of directors subsequently appointed shall
expire on such date in each fourth year thereafter. Any individual appointed
to fill a vacancy prior to the expiration of a term shall serve only for the
unexpired portion of the term. An individual serving as director at the
expiration of a term may continue to serve until a successor is appointed.



   b.   The appropriations available to pay for the expenses of the
independent budget office during each fiscal year shall not be less than ten
percentum of the appropriations available to pay for the expenses of the
office of management and budget during such fiscal year. The director shall
appoint such personnel and procure the services of such experts and
consultants, within the appropriations available therefor, as may be
necessary for the director to carry out the duties and functions assigned
herein. Such personnel and experts shall perform such duties as may be
assigned to them by the director.



   c.   The director shall be authorized to secure such information,
data, estimates and statistics from the agencies of the city as the director
determines to be necessary for the performance of the functions and duties of
the office, and such agencies shall provide such information, to the extent
that it is available, in a timely fashion. The director shall not be entitled
to obtain records which are protected by the privileges for attorney-client
communications, attorney work product, and material prepared for litigation.



   d.   There shall be an independent budget office advisory committee
consisting of ten members appointed jointly by the comptroller and the public
advocate for five year staggered terms. Of the members originally appointed,
two shall serve until the thirty-first day of March, nineteen hundred
ninety-nine, two shall serve until the thirty-first day of March, two
thousand, two shall serve until the thirty-first day of March, two thousand
one, two shall serve until the thirty-first day of March, two thousand two
and two shall serve until the thirty-first day of March, two thousand three.
The members shall all be individuals with extensive experience and knowledge
in the fields of finance, economics, accounting, public administration and
public policy analysis, including at least one former director of the New
York city office of management and budget or of a comparable office in
another local government jurisdiction in the United States; one nationally
recognized expert in the fields of budget theory and the budgetary process;
one former director of the New York state division of the budget or of a
comparable legislative or executive office in another state government; one
dean or director or former dean or director of a graduate school of business
administration located in New York city; one dean or director or former dean
or director of a graduate school of public administration or public affairs
or public policy located in New York city; one chair or former chair of a
graduate economics department of a college or university located in New York
city; one officer or former officer of, or economic advisor of, a labor
union; one officer or former officer of, or economic advisor to, a business
corporation; one officer or former officer of a civic or public interest
advocacy organization involved in budgetary matters; and one officer or
former officer of a human services advocacy organization involved in budget
matters. No member may be reappointed to consecutive terms. Vacancies
occurring because of the expiration of terms shall be filled promptly on the
recommendation of the members of the committee whose terms are not expiring.
Vacancies occurring otherwise shall be filled promptly on the recommendation
of the remaining members of the committee. The members of the committee shall
receive no compensation but shall be reimbursed for their necessary expenses.
The committee shall at its first meeting in every even numbered year elect,
from among its members, a chair and vice-chair who shall serve until the
thirty-first day of March of the next even numbered year.



Section 260. Powers and duties.



   a.   It shall be the duty of the office to provide to the
comptroller, the president of the council, the members and committees of the
council, the borough presidents, and the community boards information which
will assist such officials and bodies in the discharge of their
responsibilities which are related to the budgetary process, including:



      (1)   information with respect to the budget, appropriations
bills and proposed local laws with fiscal implications;



      (2)   information with respect to estimated revenues and
receipts and changing revenue conditions; and



      (3)   to the extent practicable, such other information or
analyses as may be requested by such officials and bodies.



   b.   The director, upon the request of a borough president or the
president of the council for a proposed local law introduced by such
official, or the chair or ranking minority member of a committee of the
council for a proposed local law being considered by such committee, shall
complete a fiscal impact statement of such proposed local law consistent with
the requirements of section thirty-three.



   c.   The director shall from time to time publish such reports as
may be appropriate to enhance official and public understanding of the
budgetary process and of the budget documents published in accordance with
the provisions of chapters six, nine and ten. The director shall from time to
time publish such reports as may be necessary or appropriate to provide such
information, data, and analysis as will enhance official and public
understanding of matters relating to city revenues, expenditures, financial
management practices and related matters.



   d.   The director may procure, for the office, up-to-date computer
equipment, obtain the services of experts and consultants in computer
technology, and develop techniques for the evaluation of revenue projections
and budgetary requirements.



   e.   The director shall make all information, data, estimates, and
statistics obtained under subdivision c of section ninety-eight, and all
studies and reports prepared by the office, available for public inspection
and copying during normal business hours and shall, to the extent
practicable, furnish a copy of any such information or report to any person
upon request at a reasonable cost.



Chapter 12: Obligations of the City



Section 265. Allocation of authorizations to department of citywide
administrative services.



   So much of the amount of any obligation authorized as is applicable to
the purchase of supplies, materials and equipment or the provision of
services, utilities or facilities which the department of citywide
administrative services is authorized to purchase or provide shall be
allotted to the department of citywide administrative services, but shall be
considered and accounted for as a part of the cost of the project for which
the obligations were authorized.



Section 265-a. Allocation of authorizations to department of design and
construction.



   So much of the amount of any obligation authorized as is applicable to
the completion of construction projects, acquisition of real property or
acquisition of personal property in connection with construction or a capital
project by the department of design and construction, including but not
limited to the provision of services, utilities or facilities of such
department, shall be allotted to the department of design and construction,
but shall be considered and accounted for as a part of the cost of the
project for which the obligations were authorized.



Section 266. Short term debt.



   a.   Subject to the provisions of subdivisions b through j of this
section, the city may issue temporary debt obligations in anticipation of
taxes and revenues as authorized by state law. The city shall issue no
short-term obligations which shall be inconsistent with the limitations set
forth in subdivisions b through j of this section. The limitations on
short-term borrowing imposed upon the city by this section shall be in
addition to the limitations on short-term borrowing imposed on the city under
the state local finance law. The powers, duties, and obligations set forth in
this section shall be subject to the powers, duties, and obligations placed
upon any state or local officer or agency, including but not limited to the
New York state financial control board, by or pursuant to the New York State
Financial Emergency Act for the City of New York, while such act remains in
effect.



   b.   Revenue or tax anticipation notes shall be issued against a
specific tax or revenues receivable which are clearly identified by source
and fiscal year.



   c.   If the amount of taxes or revenues receivable against which
anticipation notes have been issued becomes equal to the amount of such notes
outstanding, the city shall deposit all further funds obtained from such
sources into a segregated bank account which may be used only to redeem such
debt upon maturity.



   d.   The city shall not issue anticipation notes against taxes or
revenues which have been receivable for more than two years.



   e.   No tax anticipation notes shall be issued by the city in
anticipation of the collection of taxes or assessments levied for a fiscal
year which would cause the principal amount of such issue of tax anticipation
notes to exceed an amount equal to ninety per cent of the available tax levy
with respect to such issue. For purposes of this subdivision, "available tax
levy" with respect to an issue of tax anticipation notes means at any date of
computation the total amount of city real estate taxes or assessments
projected, consistent with the financial plan then in effect, to be received
in cash on or before the fifth day preceding the maturity date of such tax
anticipation note issue, less amounts required during the period between the
date of computation and the fifth day preceding such maturity date to be paid
into a general debt service fund or otherwise required to pay interest
payable on other outstanding city bonds and notes, principal (including
payments into sinking funds) coming due on outstanding city bonds and
principal to be paid from sources other than the proceeds of bonds or renewal
notes on other outstanding city notes (exclusive of revenue anticipation
notes or renewals thereof issued less than two years prior to the date of
computation) but not including payments from sinking funds required by the
terms of certain city bonds.



   f.   Tax anticipation notes and renewals thereof shall mature not
later than the last day of the fiscal year in which they were issued.



   g.   (1)   No revenue anticipation note shall be issued by the
city in anticipation of the collection or receipt of revenue in a fiscal year
which would cause the principal amount of revenue anticipation notes
outstanding to exceed ninety per cent of the available revenues for such
fiscal year. For purposes of this subdivision, "available revenues" shall be
the revenues other than real estate taxes and assessments which have been
estimated in the financial plan prepared pursuant to section two hundred
fifty-eight to be realized in cash during such year, less revenues previously
collected, other than revenues on deposit in any special fund or account
established pursuant to law for the payment of interest and/or principal of
revenue anticipation notes.



      (2)   Each issue of revenue anticipation notes shall be issued
only in anticipation of the receipt of a specific type or types of revenue
and the amount of revenue, the source of revenue and the anticipated date of
payment shall be stated in the proceedings authorizing the issuance of such
notes.



      (3)   Revenue anticipation notes shall mature not later than
the last day of the fiscal year in which they were issued, and may not be
renewed or extended to a date more than ten days after the anticipated date
of receipt of such revenue. No such renewal note shall mature after the last
day of such fiscal year unless the mayor shall certify that the revenue
against which such renewal note is issued has been properly accrued and
estimated in the financial plan set forth in section two hundred fifty-eight
in effect on the date of issuance of such renewal note; provided that in no
event shall any such renewal notes mature later than one year subsequent to
the last day of the fiscal year during which such revenue anticipation notes
were originally issued.



   h.   (1)   No bond anticipation note shall be issued by the city
in any fiscal year which would cause the principal amount of bond
anticipation notes outstanding, together with interest due or to become due
thereon, to exceed fifty per cent of the principal amount of bonds issued by
the city in the twelve months immediately preceding the month in which the
note is to be issued.



      (2)   The proceeds of each bond issue shall be (i) held in
trust for the payment, at maturity, of the principal of and interest on any
bond anticipation notes of the city issued in anticipation of such bonds and
outstanding at the time of the issuance of such bonds, (ii) paid into the
general fund of the city in repayment of any advance made from such fund
pursuant to section 165.10 of the state local finance law, and (iii) any
balance shall be expended for the object or purpose for which such bonds were
issued.



      (3)   Bond anticipation notes shall mature not later than one
year after their date of issuance and may be renewed for a period not to
exceed two years, or such longer period as may be permitted for bond
anticipation notes of the state, from the date of original issue.



   i.   Budget notes issued pursuant to section 29.00 of the state
local finance law may only be issued to fund projected expense budget
deficits. No budget notes or renewals thereof shall mature later than sixty
days prior to the last day of the fiscal year next succeeding the fiscal year
during which such budget notes were originally issued.



   j.   All references to the state local finance law in this section
shall be deemed to refer to the provisions of the New York state local
finance law as such provisions may be amended over time or any successor
provisions thereto.



Section 270. Application.



   The provisions of sections two hundred seventy-one through two hundred
seventy-nine shall apply to the several sinking funds of the city established
prior to July first, nineteen hundred eighty-one.



Section 271. Sinking fund of the city of New York.



   There is hereby continued the fund known as the "sinking fund of the
city of New York" which shall have for its purpose the amortization and
redemption of the principal of the debt of the city of New York incurred on
and after the first day of January eighteen hundred ninety-eight, and
evidenced by corporate stock of the city of New York, excepting that issued
to provide for the supply of water and that issued since the first day of
January, nineteen hundred ten, for rapid transit or rapid transit unification
purposes and that issued since the first day of July nineteen hundred
eighty-one which is redeemable from the general sinking fund or any other
sinking fund established pursuant to sections two hundred ninety through two
hundred ninety-nine.



Section 272. Water sinking fund of the city of New York.



   There is hereby continued the fund known as the "water sinking fund of
the city of New York" which shall have for its purpose the amortization and
redemption of all corporate stock of the city of New York issued on and after
the first day of January, eighteen hundred ninety-eight, to provide for the
supply of water, excepting that issued since the first day of July nineteen
hundred eighty-one which is redeemable from the general sinking fund or any
other sinking fund established pursuant to sections two hundred ninety
through two hundred ninety-nine.



Section 273. Rapid transit sinking fund of the city of New York.



   There is hereby continued the fund known as the "rapid transit sinking
fund of the city of New York" which shall have for its purpose the
amortization and redemption of all corporate stock of the city of New York
issued on and after the first day of January, nineteen hundred ten, for rapid
transit purposes, excepting that issued since the first day of July nineteen
hundred eighty-one which is redeemable from the general sinking fund or any
other sinking fund established pursuant to sections two hundred ninety
through two hundred ninety-nine.



Section 273-a. Transit unification sinking fund of the city of New York.



   There is hereby continued the fund known as the "transit unification
sinking fund of the city of New York" which shall have for its purpose the
amortization and redemption of all corporate stock of the city of New York
issued on and after the first day of January, nineteen hundred thirty-nine,
for transit unification purposes.



Section 274. Administration of sinking funds.



   The comptroller shall administer and manage the several sinking funds
of the city established prior to July first, nineteen hundred eighty-one, and
shall have custody of the securities in such funds. In the administration of
such funds the comptroller shall be deemed to be acting in a fiduciary
capacity. Where moneys of such sinking funds are invested pursuant to section
two hundred seventy-five, in securities which are obligations of the United
States or of any agency, subdivision, department, division or instrumentality
thereof, or obligations fully guaranteed or insured as to interest and
principal by an agency, subdivision, department, division or instrumentality
of the United States, acting pursuant to a grant of authority from the
congress of the United States, notwithstanding any other provision of law,
the comptroller may turn over the physical custody and safekeeping of these
obligations to (a) any bank or trust company incorporated in this state, or
(b) any national bank located in this state, or (c) any private banker duly
authorized by the superintendent of banks of this state to engage in business
here. All such private bankers shall, as private bankers, maintain a
permanent capital of not less than one million dollars in this state. The
comptroller may direct such bank, trust company or private banker to register
and hold any such securities in its custody, in the name of its nominee. The
comptroller may deposit, or authorize such bank, trust company or private
banker, to deposit, or arrange for the deposit of, any of such securities
with a federal reserve bank to be credited to an account as to which the
ownership of, and other interest in, such securities may be transferred by
entries on the books of such federal reserve bank without physical delivery
of any such securities. The records of any such bank, trust company or
private banker shall show, at all times, the ownership of such obligations,
and they shall, when held in the possession of such bank, trust company or
private banker be, at all times, kept separate from the assets of such bank,
trust company or private banker. When any such obligations are so registered
in the name of a nominee, such bank, trust company or private banker shall be
absolutely liable for any loss occasioned by the acts of such nominee with
respect to such obligations.



Section 275. Investment of sinking fund moneys.



   The comptroller may invest the moneys of the several sinking funds of
the city established prior to July first, nineteen hundred eighty-one in any
of the following securities:



      1.   Obligations of the city of New York.



      2.   Obligations of the state of New York.



      3.   Obligations of the United States or of any agency,
subdivision, department, division or instrumentality thereof, or obligations
fully guaranteed or insured as to interest and principal by any agency,
subdivision, department, division or instrumentality of the United States,
acting pursuant to a grant of authority from the congress of the United
States.



      4.   Obligations of the municipal assistance corporation for
the city of New York.



Section 276. Annual appropriations to the sinking funds.



   For the redemption of the corporate stock redeemable from the several
sinking funds of the city established prior to July first, nineteen hundred
eighty-one there shall be included annually in the budget and paid into each
of such sinking funds an amount to be estimated and certified by the
comptroller, which amount shall be not less than the aggregate of such annual
contributions, as calculated at the time each issue of corporate stock
redeemable from such sinking fund was made, would be sufficient if thereafter
annually contributed to such fund together with the accumulations of interest
thereon computed at the rate of four per centum per annum to meet and
discharge such outstanding corporate stock when the same shall be payable;
provided, however, that if at the close of a fiscal year there is in any
sinking fund a surplus over and above the reserve required by such sinking
fund computed as hereinabove provided, the comptroller, in estimating the
amount to be included for such sinking fund in the budget, shall reduce the
amount of the annual contributions by the amount of such surplus. Amounts
received annually from the operation of any rapid transit railroad for the
construction, equipment or acquisition of which corporate stock redeemable
from any such fund shall have been issued, shall not be considered or treated
as surplus, but such amounts shall be deducted from the amount certified by
the comptroller for the budget for the ensuing year.



Section 277. Monthly report.



   Not later than the tenth day in each month, the comptroller shall
submit to the mayor and the council a certified report, which shall be
published forthwith in the City Record, setting forth the operations of the
several sinking funds during the preceeding* month and the condition of such
funds at the commencement and close of such month and such other information
as may be required.



Section 278. Annual report.



   Not later than the first day of September in each year, the comptroller
shall submit to the mayor and the council a certified report, which shall be
published forthwith in convenient form as a supplement to the City Record and
which shall set forth in detail the operations of the several sinking funds
during the preceding fiscal year, the reserves required, the assets of such
funds at the close of such year, the obligations redeemable from such funds,
the dates of their maturities and such other information as may be required.



Section 290. Application.



   The provisions of sections two hundred ninety-one through two hundred
ninety-nine shall apply to the establishment, operation and administration of
sinking funds established on or after July first, nineteen hundred eighty-one.



Section 291. General sinking fund.



   There is hereby established a general sinking fund to amortize and
redeem any or all of the sinking fund bonds issued and sold from time to time
by the city of New York on or after July first, nineteen hundred eighty-one
for any purpose for which sinking fund bonds may be authorized, excepting
sinking fund bonds which are redeemable from the sinking fund of the city of
New York, the water sinking fund of the city of New York, the rapid transit
sinking fund of the city of New York, or any additional sinking fund
established pursuant to section two hundred ninety-eight.



Section 292. Administration.



   The comptroller shall administer and manage the general sinking fund
and any additional sinking funds established pursuant to section two hundred
ninety-eight of this chapter and shall have custody of the securities and
other assets in such funds. In the administration of such funds the
comptroller shall be deemed to be acting in a fiduciary capacity.



Section 293. Terms and conditions with respect to the general sinking fund.



   a.   The comptroller may:



      (1)   provide for the redemption, purchase and cancellation
prior to maturity of sinking fund bonds redeemable from the general sinking
fund;



      (2)   establish accounts within the general sinking fund for
the amortization and redemption of specific issues of sinking fund bonds and
provide for restrictions on the use of assets of any such account for
purposes other than the redemption of the sinking fund bonds to be redeemed
from such account; and



      (3)   subject to the rights of bondholders and notwithstanding
any other provision of this charter (i) withdraw moneys from the general
sinking fund, or (ii) transfer any or all responsibility for the
administration and management of the general sinking fund and the custody of
securities and other assets contained therein to any bank or trust company
incorporated in this state, or any national bank located in this state.



   b.   The sinking fund bonds of a particular series redeemable from
the general sinking fund may differ among themselves in their stated
maturities, rates of interest and applicable redemption provisions.



   c.   A schedule of annual or semiannual payments shall be
established at the time of issuance of any series of sinking fund bonds
redeemable from the general sinking fund sufficient to provide for the
redemption of the principal amount of such bonds, and annual appropriations
shall be made to the general sinking fund in accordance with such schedule of
payments.



Section 294. Redemption.



   The sinking fund bonds to be redeemed from the general sinking fund or
any additional sinking funds established pursuant to section two hundred
ninety-eight may be selected in such manner as the comptroller may determine
and may be identified on the face thereof. The principal amount of sinking
fund bonds required to be redeemed on any date by payment from the general
sinking fund or any additional sinking fund shall be reduced by the principal
amount of any such bonds which has been timely purchased or redeemed and
cancelled by the city and not theretofore applied as a credit against such
requirements.



Section 295. Defeasance.



   A series or part of a series of sinking fund bonds redeemable from the
general sinking fund or any additional sinking fund established pursuant to
section two hundred ninety-eight, including any covenants or other agreements
relative thereto, shall be fully discharged and of no further force and
effect at such time as (a) sufficient moneys or direct obligations of the
United States or obligations guaranteed by the United States have been
deposited in a separate trust account with a bank, trust company or other
fiduciary, the principal of and/or interest on which will provide sufficient
moneys to pay punctually when due at maturity or prior to maturity by
redemption, in accordance with their terms, all principal of, applicable
redemption premium, if any, and interest on such sinking fund bonds, and
irrevocable instructions from the city to such bank, trust company or other
fiduciary to make payment of such principal, applicable redemption premium,
if any, and interest with such moneys shall have been given, or (b) such
sinking fund bonds, together with interest thereon, shall have been paid in
full at maturity, or shall have otherwise been refunded, redeemed, defeased
or discharged.



Section 296. Investments.



   Subject to subdivision a of section two hundred ninety-three, the
comptroller may invest the moneys of the general sinking fund or any
additional sinking funds established pursuant to section two hundred
ninety-eight in any securities in which the city is authorized to invest,
including but not limited to the following securities:



      (1)   Obligations of the city of New York;



      (2)   Obligations of the state of New York;



      (3)   Obligations of the United States or of any agency,
subdivision, department, division or instrumentality thereof, or obligations
fully guaranteed or insured as to interest and principal by an agency,
subdivision, department, division or instrumentality of the United States,
acting pursuant to a grant of authority from the congress of the United
States;



      (4)   Obligations of the municipal assistance corporation for
the city of New York.



Section 297. [Monthly and annual reports.]



   The provisions of sections two hundred seventy-seven and two hundred
seventy-eight of the charter shall apply to the general sinking fund and any
additional sinking funds established pursuant to section two hundred
ninety-eight.



Section 298. Additional sinking funds.



   On or after July first nineteen hundred eighty-one the comptroller may
establish from time to time additional sinking funds to amortize and redeem
any or all of the sinking fund bonds issued and sold from time to time by the
city of New York on or after that date for any purpose for which sinking fund
bonds may be authorized excepting sinking fund bonds which are redeemable
from the sinking fund of the city of New York, the water sinking fund of the
city of New York, the rapid transit sinking fund of the city of New York or
the general sinking fund. Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of
section two hundred ninety-three, such additional sinking funds shall be
established with such terms and conditions as the comptroller shall prescribe.



Section 299. [Redemption from sinking funds established prior to July first,
nineteen hundred eighty-one.]



   The comptroller shall determine whether sinking fund bonds issued on or
after July first, nineteen hundred eighty-one shall be redeemable from any of
the several sinking funds of the city established prior to July first
nineteen hundred eighty-one, the general sinking fund or any of the
additional sinking funds established pursuant to section two hundred
ninety-eight.



Chapter 13: Procurement



Section 310. Scope.



   Except as otherwise provided in this charter or by statute,



      1.   all goods, services or construction to be paid for out of
the city treasury or out of moneys under the control of or assessed or
collected by the city shall be procured as prescribed in this chapter;
provided, however, that for (i) the office of an independently elected city
official, or (ii) the council, where the provisions of this chapter require
action by the mayor or an appointee of the mayor in regard to a particular
procurement except for mayoral action pursuant to subdivision c of section
three hundred thirty-four, such action shall not be taken by the mayor or
such appointee of the mayor, but shall be taken respectively, by (i) by such
elected official or (ii) the speaker of the council, or another member of the
council designated by the speaker with the approval of a majority of the
members of the council, and



      2.   all goods, services or construction to be procured by an
entity, the majority of the members of whose board are city officials or are
individuals appointed directly or indirectly by city officials shall be
procured as prescribed in this chapter; provided, however, that where the
provisions of this chapter require action by the mayor or an appointee of the
mayor in regard to a particular procurement except for mayoral action
pursuant to subdivision c of section three hundred thirty-four, such action
shall not be taken by the mayor or such appointee of the mayor, but shall be
taken by the governing board of such entity or by the chair of the board or
chief executive officer of such entity pursuant to a resolution adopted by
such board delegating such authority to such officer.



Section 311. Procurement Policy Board.



   a.   There shall be a procurement policy board consisting of five
members, three of whom shall be appointed by the mayor and two of whom shall
be appointed by the comptroller. Each member shall serve at the pleasure of
the appointing official. Members shall have demonstrated sufficient business
or professional experience to discharge the functions of the board. At least
one member appointed by the mayor and one member appointed by the comptroller
shall not hold any other public office or public employment. The remaining
members shall not be prohibited from holding any other public office or
employment provided that no member may have substantial authority for the
procurement of goods, services or construction pursuant to this chapter. The
mayor shall designate the chair.



   b.   The board shall promulgate rules as required by this chapter,
including rules establishing:



      1.   the methods for soliciting bids or proposals and awarding
contracts, consistent with the provisions of this chapter;



      2.   the manner in which agencies shall administer contracts
and oversee the performance of contracts and contractors;



      3.   standards and procedures to be used in determining
whether bidders are responsible;



      4.   the circumstances under which procurement may be used for
the provision of technical, consultant or personal services, which shall
include but not be limited to, circumstances where the use of procurement is
(a) desirable to develop, maintain or strengthen the relationships between
non-profit and charitable organizations and the communities where services
are to be provided, (b) cost-effective, or (c) necessary to (i) obtain
special expertise, (ii) obtain personnel or expertise not available in the
agency, (iii) to provide a service not needed on a long-term basis, (iv)
accomplish work within a limited amount of time, or (v) avoid a conflict of
interest;



      5.   the form and content of the files which agencies are
required to maintain pursuant to section three hundred thirty-four and such
other contract records as the board deems necessary and appropriate;



      6.   the time schedules within which city officials shall be
required to take the actions required by this chapter, sections thirteen
hundred four and thirteen hundred five, or by any rule issued pursuant
thereto, in order for contracts to be entered into, registered or otherwise
approved, and time schedules within which city officials should take action
pursuant to any other provision of law or rule regarding individual
contracts, which rules shall specify the appropriate remedies, including
monetary remedies, for failure to meet the terms of any applicable schedule
for taking such actions. The board may set forth exceptions to these rules.
The promulgation of rules defining time schedules for actions by the division
of economic and financial opportunity of the department of small business
services and the division of labor services of such department shall require
the approval of each division, as such rules pertain to actions required of
such divisions, prior to the adoption of such rules by the procurement policy
board;



      7.   procedures for the fair and equitable resolution of
contract disputes; and



      8.   rules relating to the making of small purchases in a
manner that will advance the purposes of the program for minority- and
women-owned business enterprises and emerging business enterprises
established pursuant to subdivision b of section thirteen hundred four.



      9.   such other rules as are required by this chapter.



   c.   The board may promulgate such additional rules, policies and
procedures consistent with and as may be necessary to implement the
provisions of this chapter. The board shall annually review all of its rules,
policies and procedures and make such revisions as the board deems necessary
and desirable. Nothing herein shall prevent the board from reviewing its
rules, policies, and procedures, and making such revisions as the board deems
necessary and desirable, more than once per year.



   d.   The board shall promulgate rules to facilitate the timely and
efficient procurement of client services, and to ensure that such contracts
are administered in the best interests of the city. Such rules shall include
but not be limited to: (i) rules authorizing city agencies to meet annual
financial audit requirements through the acceptance of consolidated audits
across multiple contracts and multiple agencies; (ii) rules providing for
expedited renewal or extension of existing client services contracts; (iii)
rules mandating the promulgation of draft and final contract plans by all
agencies procuring client services.



   e.   The board shall submit an annual report to the mayor,
comptroller, and council setting forth the professional standards for agency
contracting officers adopted by the mayor, including any applicable
certification process.



   f.   In the promulgation of any rules pertaining to the procurement
of construction or construction related services, the board shall consult
with any office designated by the mayor to provide overall coordination to
the city's capital construction activities.



   g.   The board shall make such recommendations as it deems necessary
and proper to the mayor and the council regarding the organization, personnel
structure and management of the agency procurement function including, where
appropriate, recommendations for revision of this charter or local laws
affecting procurement by the city. Such reports may include recommendations
regarding agency use of advisory groups to assist in preparation of bids or
proposals and selection of contractors. The board shall also review the form
and content of city contract documents and shall submit to the law department
recommendations for standardization and simplification of contract language.



   h.   The board shall not exercise authority with respect to the
award or administration of any particular contract, or with respect to any
dispute, claim or litigation pertaining thereto.



   i.   In addition to other rules authorized by this section, the
board may provide by rule that:



      1.   agencies may make procurements of goods, services and
construction for amounts not exceeding five hundred thousand dollars from
businesses certified as minority or women-owned business enterprises pursuant
to section thirteen hundred four of the charter without a formal competitive
process.



      2.   agencies may award contracts for goods and services on
the basis of best value to the bidder or offerer which optimizes quality,
cost and efficiency, among responsive and responsible bidders or offerers.
Such basis shall reflect, wherever possible, objective and quantifiable
analysis and may include the prospective bidder's record of complying with
existing labor standards, maintaining harmonious labor relations, and
protecting the health and safety of workers. Such basis may also identify a
quantitative factor for awarding of contracts for bidders or offerers that
are businesses certified as minority or women-owned business enterprises
pursuant to article fifteen-a of the executive law and section thirteen
hundred four of the charter. Where an agency identifies a quantitative factor
pursuant to this paragraph, the agency must specify that businesses certified
as minority or women-owned business enterprises pursuant to article fifteen-a
of the executive law as well as those certified as minority or women-owned
business enterprises pursuant to section thirteen hundred four of the charter
are eligible to qualify for such factor. Nothing in this paragraph shall be
construed as a requirement that such businesses be concurrently certified as
minority or women-owned business enterprises under both article fifteen-a of
the executive law and section thirteen hundred four of the charter to qualify
for such quantitative factor.



      3.   the rule or rules promulgated to implement paragraph one
of this subdivision shall provide that the city shall, commencing on the
first of October of the first full calendar year following the adoption of
such rule or rules, submit an annual report to the governor and the state
legislature of the total number and total dollar value of procurements of
goods and services for amounts not exceeding one hundred fifty thousand
dollars from:



         (i)   businesses certified as minority or women-owned
business enterprises pursuant to section thirteen hundred four of the charter;



         (ii)   all other businesses; and



         (iii)   information about the number of businesses
certified as minority or women-owned business enterprises pursuant to section
thirteen hundred four of this charter able to perform the specific type and
scale of work involved in each procurement.



(Am. 2017 N.Y. Laws Ch. 504, 12/29/2017; Am. 2018 N.Y. Laws Ch. 19,
4/18/2018, retro. eff. 12/29/2017; Am. 2019 N.Y. Laws Ch. 98, 7/15/2019)



Section 312. Procurement; general rule and exceptions.



   a.   Prior to entering into, renewing, or extending a contract
valued at more than two hundred thousand dollars to provide standard or
professional services, including agency task orders pursuant to multi-agency
task order contracts, but excluding emergency procurements,
government-to-government purchases, and the procurement of legal services or
consulting services in support of current or anticipated litigation,
investigative or confidential services, an agency shall follow the procedure
established herein and the mayor shall comply with the reporting requirements
set forth in paragraph 8.



      1.   Prior to issuing an invitation for bids, request for
proposals, or other solicitation, or renewing or extending an existing
contract, the agency shall determine whether such contract is the result of
or would result in the displacement of any city employee within the agency.
For the purpose of this section, "displacement" shall mean a reduction in the
number of funded positions, including but not limited to, that resulting from
the attrition; layoff; demotion; bumping; involuntary transfer to a new
class, title, or location; time-based reductions, or reductions in customary
hours of work, wages, or benefits of any city employee.



         a.   There shall be a presumptive determination that a
proposed contract is the result of or would result in displacement if any of
the following events occurred in the three year period preceding the date the
agency intends to issue an invitation for bids, request for proposal, or
other solicitation, or renew or extend an existing contract:



            (1)   the displacement of a city employee within
the agency who performs or has performed the services sought by the proposed
contract and/or services of a substantially similar nature or purpose; or



            (2)   the announcement of spending reductions in
connection with a budgetary program, including but not limited to a Program
to Eliminate the Gap, that could result or has resulted in the displacement
of a city employee within the agency who performs or has performed the
services sought by the proposed contract and/or services of a substantially
similar nature or purpose; or



            (3)   any other statement by an agency or the
mayor of a specific anticipated employment action that could result or has
resulted in the displacement of a city employee within the agency who
performs or has performed the services sought by the proposed contract and/or
services of a substantially similar nature or purpose.



         b.   If the agency determines that displacement would
not occur, it shall include a certification to that effect, signed by the
agency head, in any invitation for bids, request for proposals, or other
solicitation, or with any contract renewal or extension. Such certification
shall detail the basis upon which the agency determined that displacement
would not occur, construing broadly the nature of the services sought and
providing information including but not limited to: (i) whether any civil
service title and/or job title within the agency currently performs the
services solicited and/or services of a substantially similar nature or
purpose, the names of such titles, and the extent to which agency employees
within such titles currently perform such services; (ii) whether the
solicited services expand, supplement, or replace existing services, and a
detailed description comparing the solicited services with such existing
services; (iii) whether there is capacity within the agency to perform the
services solicited and, if there is no such capacity, a detailed description
specifying the ways in which the agency lacks such capacity; (iv) for the
term of the proposed contract, the projected headcount of employees within
such titles or employees who perform such services and/or services of a
substantially similar nature or purpose; and (v) confirmation that none of
the events set forth in subparagraph a of this paragraph occurred within the
agency in the three year period preceding the date such agency intends to
issue an invitation for bids, request for proposal, or other solicitation, or
renew or extend an existing contract.



         c.   If the agency determines that displacement would
occur, the agency shall determine the costs incurred and the benefits derived
in performing the service, consistent with the scope and specifications
within the solicitation, renewal, or extension, with city employees, and
shall submit such analysis, with all supporting documentation, prior to
issuance of any solicitation or entry into any contract renewal or extension,
to the comptroller.



      2.   Immediately upon receipt of bids, proposals, and other
solicitation responses, or prior to the renewal or extension of an existing
contract, the agency shall submit such determination, analysis, and
supporting documentation to the council and to the appropriate collective
bargaining representatives representing employees who would be affected
pursuant to paragraph 1 of subdivision a of this section.



      3.   Prior to award of a contract, a renewal, or an extension,
the agency shall perform a comparative analysis of the costs expected to be
incurred and the benefits expected to be derived from entering into,
renewing, or extending a contract with the proposed vendor, based on such
vendor's best and final offer, and such agency's analysis of the costs
incurred and the benefits derived from providing the service with city
employees. If the agency head intends to award, renew, or extend the
contract, he or she shall submit the reasons therefor, together with such
analysis, and all supporting documentation, to the comptroller, the council,
and the appropriate collective bargaining representatives representing
employees who would be affected pursuant to paragraph 1 of subdivision a of
this section.



      4.   The council may, within thirty days after receipt of such
reasons, analysis, and supporting documentation hold a hearing on this
matter. No contract award, renewal, or extension shall be made prior to the
expiration of this thirty-day period or a council hearing, whichever is
sooner.



      5.   a.   All cost and comparative analyses required under
this section shall be conducted in accordance with standard methodology of
the office of management and budget, and consistent with the rules of the
procurement policy board, as both are modified herein, subject to further
modification by local law. Such analyses shall include all reasonable costs
associated with performing the service using city employees and all
reasonable costs associated with performing the service under the proposed
contract or contract renewal or extension.



         b.   Such analyses shall further include the total
number, qualifications, job descriptions, and titles of all personnel to be
employed by the vendor under the proposed contract or contract renewal or
extension, as well as the nature and cost of salaries and benefits to be
provided to such personnel.



         c.   Such analyses shall further include, but not be
limited to, the cost of employee supervision directly related to the
provision of the service, vendor solicitation, contract preparation, contract
administration, monitoring and evaluating the contractor, capitalization of
equipment over the period such equipment shall be in use, supplies, the cost
of providing the equivalent quantity and quality of service by city employees
compared to the cost of providing such service by contract, based upon the
best and final offer of the proposed vendor, and such other factors as will
assist in arriving at full and accurate cost determinations and comparisons.



      6.   The reasons given to award, renew, or extend the
contracts shall include all factors that have been considered in determining
whether contracting for this service is in the best interest of the city,
whether or not such reasons are contained within the cost or comparative
analyses. Such factors shall include, but not be limited to, the potential
for contractor default, the time required to perform the service, and the
quality of the service to be delivered.



      7.   The mayor or his or her designee may prepare and
implement a plan of assistance for displaced city employees, which may
include, but need not be limited to, training to place such employees in
comparable positions within the contracting agency or any other agency. The
cost of such assistance plan may be included within the cost of
contracting-out in the cost and comparative analyses.



      8.   a.   For the purposes of this paragraph, "agency"
means a city, county, borough or other office, position, administration,
department, division, bureau, board, commission, authority, corporation,
advisory committee or other agency of government, the expenses of which are
paid in whole or in part from the city treasury, and shall include but not be
limited to, the department of education, the health and hospitals
corporation, and the New York city housing authority, but shall not include
any court, or any local development corporation or other not for profit
corporation or institution, including such a corporation or institution
maintaining or operating a public library, museum, botanical garden,
arboretum, tomb, memorial building, aquarium, zoological garden or similar
facility.



         b.   The mayor shall, no later than July 31st of each
year, produce and publish on the mayor's office of contract services website
a plan and schedule for each agency detailing the anticipated contracting
actions of each such agency for the upcoming fiscal year. The plan and
schedule shall include: (i) information specific to each prospective
invitation for bids, request for proposal, or other solicitation, including,
but not limited to, the nature of services sought, the term of the proposed
contract, the method of the solicitation the agency intends to utilize, the
anticipated fiscal year quarter of the planned solicitation, the civil
service and/or job titles within the agency who perform the services sought
and/or services of a substantially similar nature or purpose, if any, and the
headcount of employees within such titles who perform such services; and (ii)
information specific to each proposed contract renewal or extension,
including, but not limited to, any modifications sought to the nature of the
services performed under the contract, the term of the proposed renewed or
extended contract, the reason(s) the agency intends to renew or extend such
contract, the month and year of the expiration of the existing contract, the
civil service and/or job titles within the agency who perform the services
sought and/or services of a substantially similar nature or purpose, if any,
and the headcount of employees within such titles who perform such services.



         c.   If an agency intends to issue an invitation for
bids, request for proposal, or other solicitation, or renew or extend an
existing contract, but the mayor fails to include such prospective
invitation, request, solicitation, renewal or extension in the plan and
schedule, the mayor shall provide public notice sixty days before such agency
issues such invitation, request, or solicitation, or enters into such renewal
or extension. Such notice, which shall be posted on the mayor's office of
contract services website and in the city record, shall include: (i)
information specific to the prospective invitation for bids, request for
proposal, or other solicitation, including, but not limited to, the nature of
services sought, the term of the proposed contract, the method of the
solicitation the agency intends to utilize, the civil service and/or job
titles within the agency who perform the services sought and/or services of a
substantially similar nature or purpose, if any, and the headcount of
employees within such titles who perform such services; or (ii) information
specific to the proposed contract renewal or extension, including, but not
limited to, any modifications sought to the nature of the services performed
under the contract, the term of the proposed renewed or extended contract,
the reason(s) the agency intends to renew or extend such contract, the civil
service and/or job titles within the agency who perform the services sought
and/or services of a substantially similar nature or purpose, if any, and the
headcount of employees within such titles who perform such services.



   b.   1.   Except as provided for in sections three hundred
fourteen, three hundred fifteen and three hundred sixteen, contracts shall be
awarded by competitive sealed bidding under such rules as shall be made by
the procurement policy board, except that, in a special case as defined in
subdivision b of this section, the head of an agency proposing to award such
contract may order otherwise in accordance with policies and procedures
established by the procurement policy board.



      2.   A determination by the head of an agency to use other
than competitive sealed bidding except as provided for by sections three
hundred fourteen and three hundred sixteen shall be made in writing, stating
the reasons why competitive sealed bidding is not practicable or not
advantageous and why the method of procurement selected pursuant to section
three hundred seventeen is the most competitive alternative that is
appropriate under the circumstances. The head of the agency shall include the
determination or a summary of the determination in the notice of
solicitation, or for an emergency procurement in the notice of award,
required to be published pursuant to section three hundred twenty-five of
this chapter.



   c.   1.   For the purposes of this chapter, the term "special
case" shall be defined as a situation in which it is either not practicable
or not advantageous to the city to use competitive sealed bidding for one of
the following reasons:



         i.   specifications cannot be made sufficiently definite
and certain to permit selection based on price alone;



         ii.   judgment is required in evaluating competing
proposals, and it is in the best interest of the city to require a balancing
of price, quality, and other factors;



         iii.   the good, service or construction to be procured
is available only from a single source;



         iv.   testing or experimentation is required with a
product or technology, or a new source for a product or technology, or to
evaluate the service or reliability of such product or technology; or



         v.   such other reasons as defined by rule of the
procurement policy board.



      2.   The procurement policy board may provide by rule that it
is either not practicable or not advantageous to the city, for one of the
reasons set forth in paragraph one of this subdivision, to procure a
specified type of good, service or construction by competitive sealed bidding.



Section 313. Competitive sealed bidding.



   a.   The term competitive sealed bidding shall mean a method of
procurement where the award of a contract is made to the lowest responsible
bidder whose bid meets the requirements and criteria set forth in the
invitation for bids.



   b.   Procedures for competitive sealed bidding.



      1.   Bids shall be solicited through an invitation for bids,
which shall include a purchase description and a notice of where vendors may
obtain a copy of all contractual terms and conditions applicable to the
procurement. A notice of the intention to solicit bids shall be publicly
advertised in accordance with the provisions of section three hundred
twenty-five of this chapter. The terms of such contracts shall be settled by
the corporation counsel as an act of preliminary specification to an
invitation for bids.



      2.   The agency letting the contract may reject all bids if it
shall deem it for the interest of the city so to do; if not, it shall,
without other consent or approval, award the contract to the lowest
responsible bidder, unless the mayor shall determine in writing, justifying
the reasons therefor, that it is the best interest of the city that a bid
other than that of the lowest responsible bidder shall be accepted. Such
determination shall be published in the City Record. Tie bids are to be
decided by the agency letting the contract and the award made. Whenever a
contract is awarded to other than the lowest bidder because the lowest bidder
is determined by the agency not to be a responsible bidder or because the
lowest bid is determined by the agency to not meet the requirements and
criteria set forth in the invitation for bids, the agency making such
determination and awarding such contract shall immediately notify the lowest
bidder of such determination and shall file in the agency contract file a
statement in detail of the reasons therefor.



      3.   Any bidder who is declared not responsible by an agency
and any bidder whose bid is determined by an agency to not meet the
requirements and criteria set forth in the invitation for bids may, within
five days of receipt of notice of the agency decision, appeal such decision
to the agency head. A determination of an agency head of an appeal of a
decision of non-responsibility may be appealed to the mayor who shall take
final action regarding such matter. A determination of an agency head of an
appeal of a decision that a bid does not meet the requirements and criteria
set forth in the invitation for bids shall be final.



   c.   No bid shall be valid unless accompanied by a deposit in the
amount and manner set forth and specified in the proposal; provided, however,
that the procurement policy board shall establish such requirements for bid
deposits as are necessary and practicable, and, pursuant to rules and
standards, may waive the bid deposit requirement for specific classes of
purchase or types of transactions. Upon the award of the contract the
deposits of unsuccessful bidders shall be returned to them, and the deposit
of the successful bidder shall be returned upon execution of the contract and
furnishing of the required security.



   d.   Every invitation for bids shall contain a provision that in the
event of the failure of the bidder to execute the contract and furnish the
required security within ten days after notice of the award of the contract,
the deposit or so much thereof as shall be applicable to the amount of the
award made shall be retained by the city, and the bidder shall be liable for
and shall agree to pay on demand the difference between the price bid and the
price for which such contract shall be subsequently relet, including the cost
of such reletting and less the amount of such deposit. No plea of mistake in
such accepted bid shall be available to the bidder for the recovery of the
deposit or as a defense to any action based upon such accepted bid.



Section 314. Small purchases.



   a.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this charter, the
procurement policy board and the council may, by concurrent action, establish
dollar limits for procurement of goods, services, construction, or
construction-related services that may be made without competition or without
public advertisement. Awards pursuant to this section shall be made in
accordance with rules of the procurement policy board.



   b.   On or before September thirtieth, two thousand and three, and
on or before the last day of every quarter thereafter, the mayor or his or
her designee shall submit to the council and the comptroller a report
detailing each small purchase award made pursuant to this section during the
quarter that ended three months before such report is due and for which
information is required to be contained in the computerized data base
maintained pursuant to subdivision a of section 6-116.2 of the administrative
code. Such report shall provide the name of the vendor selected to fulfill
the requirements of each such small purchase award, the date and dollar
amount of each such small purchase award and the type of goods or services
provided.



Section 315. Emergency procurement.



   Notwithstanding the provisions of section three hundred twelve of this
chapter, in the case of unforeseen danger to life, safety, property or a
necessary service, an emergency procurement may be made with the prior
approval of the comptroller and corporation counsel, provided that such
procurement shall be made with such competition as is practicable under the
circumstances, consistent with the provisions of section three hundred
seventeen of this chapter. A written determination of the basis for the
emergency and the selection of the contractor shall be placed in the agency
contract file, and shall further be submitted to the council no later than
fifteen days following contract award, and the determination or summary of
such determination shall be included in the notice of the award of contract
published pursuant to section three hundred twenty-five of this chapter.



Section 316. Intergovernmental procurement.



   Notwithstanding any other requirement of this chapter,



      a.   any goods may be procured, ordered or awarded through the
United States General Services Administration, or any other federal agency if
the price is lower than the prevailing market price; any services or
construction may be procured, ordered or awarded through the United States
General Services Administration, or any other federal agency if the price is
fair and reasonable, and



      b.   any goods may be procured, ordered or awarded through the
New York State office of general services, or any other state agency, if the
price is lower than the prevailing market price; any services or construction
may be procured, ordered or awarded through the New York State office of
general services, or any other state agency, if the price is fair and
reasonable.



Section 317. Alternatives to competitive sealed bidding.



   a.   If, in accordance with section three hundred twelve, an agency
determines that the use of competitive sealed bidding is not practicable or
not advantageous to the city, the agency shall select the most competitive
alternative method of procurement provided for by sections three hundred
eighteen through three hundred twenty-two which is appropriate under the
circumstance. Each agency contract file shall contain documentation of such
determination and of the basis upon which each contract is awarded, as is
required by the procurement policy board.



   b.   Each contract for goods, services or construction in value of
more than five million dollars proposed by an agency to be awarded which is
let by other than (i) competitive sealed bidding, (ii) competitive sealed
bids from prequalified vendors, or (iii) competitive sealed proposals, where
the weight assigned to each of the factors or criteria to be considered in
selecting the proposal most advantageous to the city was set forth in a
writing filed in the agency contract file prior to the opening of proposals,
shall require the approval of the mayor prior to its execution.
Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, the mayor may, where the mayor has
determined that it is appropriate, exclude an agency's contracts or a
particular category of contracts from the approval requirement of this
subdivision.



Section 318. Competitive sealed bids from prequalified vendors.



   In accordance with section three hundred seventeen, bids may be
solicited from vendors who have been prequalified for the provision of a
good, service or construction pursuant to section three hundred twenty-four
by mailing notice to each prequalified vendor or, if special circumstances
require, to a selected list of prequalified vendors. Award of the contract
shall be made in accordance with the provisions of section three hundred
thirteen of this chapter. A determination to employ selective solicitation
for a particular procurement or for a particular category of procurement
shall be made in writing by the agency and approved by the mayor; unless the
mayor, upon adequate assurances of an agency's capacity to comply with
procedural requirements in relation to this section, has determined that such
approval is not required for an agency's contracts or particular categories
of contracts.



Section 319. Competitive sealed proposals.



   In accordance with section three hundred seventeen, proposals may be
solicited through a request for proposals with award to the responsible
offeror whose proposal is determined to be the most advantageous to the city,
taking into consideration the price and such other factors or criteria as are
set forth in the request for proposals. No other factors or criteria shall be
used in the evaluation and award of the contract except those specified in
the request for proposals. Discussions may be conducted with responsible
offerors who submit proposals, provided that offerors shall be accorded fair
treatment with respect to any opportunity for discussion and revision of the
proposals.



Section 320. Competitive sealed proposals from prequalified vendors.



   In accordance with section three hundred seventeen, proposals may be
solicited from vendors who have been prequalified for the provision of a
good, service or construction pursuant to section three hundred twenty-four
by mailing notice to each prequalified vendor or, if special circumstances
require, to a selected list of prequalified vendors. Award of the contract
shall be made in accordance with the provisions of section three hundred
nineteen. A determination to employ selective solicitation for a particular
procurement or for a particular category of procurement shall be made in
writing by the agency by the mayor; unless the mayor, upon adequate assurance
of an agency's capacity to comply with the procedural requirements in
relation to this section, has determined that such approval is not required
for an agency's contracts or particular categories of contracts.



Section 321. Sole source.



   a.   In accordance with section three hundred seventeen, a contract
may be awarded for a good, service or construction without competition when
an agency determines, pursuant to rules promulgated by the procurement policy
board, that there is only one source for the required good, service or
construction. The agency contract file shall contain the agency's
determination that only a single source is available for the required good,
service or construction, including the process by which the agency made such
determination. Copies of such notice shall be filed with the comptroller.



   b.   Whenever an agency determines that there is only a single
source for a good, service or construction, an agency shall give immediate
notice in the City Record of such determination and shall in such notice
solicit the application of vendors qualified to provide such good, service or
construction, or interested in providing such good service or construction in
the future. The procurement policy board shall by rule define the timing and
duration of such notification to ensure that vendors qualified to provide
such good, service or construction have sufficient opportunity to express
their interest to the agency prior to the initiation of any sole source
negotiation; provided, however, that if the agency has determined that it
should not reveal to the vendor with whom it is negotiating that it is doing
so on a sole source basis under circumstances defined by rule of the
procurement policy board, the notice required by this subdivision shall be
made upon the completion of such negotiations or the award of the contract.
Vendors interested in providing such good, service or construction in the
future shall be prequalified in accordance with section three hundred
twenty-four, or shall be included for receipt of notice in accordance with
subdivision a of section three hundred twenty-five.



Section 322. Alternative procurement procedures.



   In accordance with section three hundred seventeen, a contract may be
awarded according to another procurement procedure established by rule of the
procurement policy board, under circumstances, defined by rule of the
procurement policy board, in which the use of such procedures is in the best
interest of the city. An agency determination to utilize such an alternative
procurement procedure for a particular procurement or for a particular type
of procurement shall require the written approval of the mayor prior to
seeking bids or proposals. The agency contract file shall contain the
determination to use an alternative procurement procedure which shall state
(1) which circumstances defined by the board to be in the best interest of
the city apply to the procurement, including the basis upon which the agency
made such determination, and (2) which procedure, as defined by the board
pursuant to this section, was used in awarding the contract.



Section 323. Multi-step sealed proposals.



   A preliminary request for proposals may be issued requesting the
submission of unpriced offers. Submissions in response to such a preliminary
request for proposals may be relied upon by an agency (a) to solicit
competitive sealed bids in accordance with section three hundred thirteen of
this chapter; (b) to solicit competitive sealed bids from prequalified
vendors in accordance with section three hundred eighteen; (c) to solicit
competitive sealed proposals in accordance with section three hundred
nineteen; or (d) to solicit proposals from prequalified vendors in accordance
with section three hundred twenty.



Section 324. Prequalification.



   a.   Agencies may maintain lists of prequalified vendors and entry
into a prequalified group shall be continuously available. Prospective
vendors may be prequalified as contractors for the provision of particular
types of goods, services and construction, in accordance with general
criteria established by rule of the procurement policy board which may
include, but shall not be limited to, the experience, past performance,
ability to undertake work, financial capability, responsibility, and
reliability of prospective bidders, and their status as a certified minority
and women owned business enterprise pursuant to section thirteen hundred four
of the charter,and which may be supplemented by criteria established by rule
of the agency for the prequalification of vendors for particular types of
goods, services or construction or by criteria published in the City Record
by the agency prior to the prequalification of vendors for a particular
procurement. Such prequalification may be by categories designated by size
and other factors.



   b.   Any vendor who is denied prequalification or whose
prequalification is revoked by an agency may appeal such decision to the
agency head. A determination of an agency head may be appealed to the office
of administrative trials and hearings for a hearing and such office shall
take final action regarding such matter. A decision by an agency to suspend a
vendor's prequalification may be appealed to the agency head, provided that
if such suspension extends for more than three months, it shall be deemed a
revocation of the prequalification for the purposes of this section.



(Am. 2019 N.Y. Laws Ch. 98, 7/15/2019)



Section 325. Planning and Notification.



   a.   Agencies that award client services contracts shall produce a
draft and final plan and schedule detailing anticipated contracting actions
for the upcoming fiscal year, and shall hold at least one public hearing each
year immediately following the release of the draft plan and schedule to
receive testimony regarding the plan and schedule. The draft and final plan
and schedule shall include, but not be limited to: the type of services to be
provided, the authorized maximum amount of funding associated with the
program, the authorized number of contracts to be let for a particular
program, the month and year of the next planned competitive solicitation.
Failure to include a contract in the plan and schedule issued pursuant to
this section shall not be grounds for invalidating the contract. The
procurement policy board shall promulgate rules governing the issuance of the
draft and final plans and schedules, which shall ensure that the draft plan
and schedule is issued promptly following the submission of the executive
budget and that the final plan and schedule is issued no later than September
thirtieth each year.



   b.   Pursuant to rules of the procurement policy board, each agency
shall



      1.   for each category of goods, services or construction
which is regularly procured by the agency, periodically publish in the City
Record a notice soliciting the names of vendors interested in being notified
of future procurement opportunities in each such category,



      2.   for each category of goods, services or construction for
which the agency prequalifies vendors for future procurement, periodically
publish in the City Record a notice soliciting the names and qualifications
of vendors interested in being considered for prequalification for such
category, and



      3.   publish in the City Record, and, where appropriate, in
newspapers of city, state or national distribution and trade publications,
notice of



         (a)   the solicitation of bids or proposals pursuant to
section three hundred thirteen and three hundred seventeen through three
hundred twenty-two, where the value of a contract is estimated to be above
the small purchase limits, except where the agency has determined pursuant to
section three hundred eighteen or three hundred twenty that solicitation
should be limited to prequalified vendors,



         (b)   the award of a contract exceeding the small
purchase limits in value. Each such notice of award shall indicate the name
of the contractor, the dollar value of the contract, the procurement method
by which the contract was let, and for contracts let by other than
competitive sealed bidding, a citation of the clause of subdivision b of
section three hundred twelve pursuant to which a procurement method other
than competitive sealed bidding was utilized.



   c.   The procurement policy board, in consultation with the
commissioner of citywide administrative services, shall promulgate rules
providing for the publication and content of notices of contract actions
required by this chapter. Such rules shall include provisions regarding,



      i.   the timing and frequency of notices,



      ii.   the required duration of solicitation periods,



      iii.   the form and content of notices, including the
organization and presentation of such notices within standard categories of
goods, services and construction which are sufficiently detailed to provide
meaningful distinctions among categories.



   d.   The notice required by subparagraph a of paragraph three of
subdivision a of this section shall not apply to contracts awarded on an
emergency basis pursuant to section three hundred fifteen, provided that the
agency shall, as soon as is practicable, publish notice that such a contract
has been entered into, pursuant to rules of the procurement policy board, nor
shall such notice requirements apply where the notice would disclose
litigation strategy or otherwise impair the conduct of litigation by the city.



Section 326. Public hearings on contract awards.



   a.   Prior to entering into any contract for goods, services or
construction to be awarded by other than competitive sealed bidding or
competitive sealed bids from prequalified vendors, the value of which exceeds
one hundred thousand dollars, the agency shall upon reasonable public notice
conduct a public hearing to receive testimony regarding the proposed
contract. Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, if, within a period of time
after such notice, which period of time shall be determined by the
procurement policy board, no individual requests an opportunity to speak at
such a public hearing with respect to any such proposed contract the value of
which does not exceed one million dollars, then such public hearing need not
be conducted. The procurement policy board may by rule exempt from this
public hearing requirement contracts to be let which do not differ materially
in terms and conditions, as defined by the board, from contracts currently
held by the city where the parties to such contracts are the same; provided,
that under no circumstance may such exemption apply to any contract in value
exceeding ten million dollars.



   b.   The requirements of this section shall not apply to any
procurement (i) let pursuant to a finding of an emergency under section three
hundred fifteen, (ii) required to be made on an accelerated basis due to
markets which experience significant, short-term price fluctuations, as
identified by rule of the board, or (iii) where a public hearing would
disclose litigation strategy or otherwise impair the conduct of litigation by
the city.



Section 327. Certification of legal authority and procedural requisites.



   a.   In the case of any contract which is let by other than
competitive sealed bidding, the mayor shall certify, prior to the filing of
the contract with the comptroller for registration in accordance with section
three hundred twenty-eight of this chapter, that the procedural requisites
for the solicitation and award of the contract have been met. The mayor may
delegate such function to the agency proposing to award a contract only upon
adequate assurance of an agency's capacity to comply with procedural
requirements.



   b.   The corporation counsel shall certify prior to the filing of a
contract with the comptroller for registration in accordance with section
three hundred twenty-eight of this chapter, that each agency proposing to
award a contract has legal authority to award each such contract.



Section 328. Registration of contracts by the comptroller.



   a.   No contract or agreement executed pursuant to this charter or
other law shall be implemented until (1) a copy has been filed with the
comptroller and (2) either the comptroller has registered it or thirty days
have elapsed from the date of filing, whichever is sooner, unless an
objection has been filed pursuant to subdivision c of this section, or the
comptroller has grounds for not registering the contract under subdivision b
of this section.



   b.   Subject to the provisions of subdivision c of this section, the
comptroller shall register a contract within thirty days unless the
comptroller has information indicating that:



      i.   there remains no unexpended and unapplied balance of the
appropriation or fund applicable thereto, sufficient to pay the estimated
expense of executing such contract, as certified by the officer making the
same;



      ii.   that a certification required by section three hundred
twenty-seven of this chapter has not been made; or



      iii.   the proposed vendor has been debarred by the city in
accordance with the provisions of section three hundred thirty-five.



   c.   The comptroller may, within thirty days of the date of filing
of the contract with the comptroller's office, object in writing to the
registration of the contract, if in the comptroller's judgment there is
sufficient reason to believe that there is possible corruption in the letting
of the contract or that the proposed contractor is involved in corrupt
activity. Such objection shall be delivered within such thirty day period to
the mayor setting forth in detail the grounds for the comptroller's
determination. After the mayor has responded to the comptroller's objections
in writing, indicating (i) the corrective actions if any, that have been
taken or will be taken in response to the comptroller's objections, or (ii)
the reasons why the mayor disagrees with the comptroller's objections, the
mayor may require registration of the contract despite the comptroller's
objections. Such response by the mayor shall not serve as the basis for
further objection by the comptroller, and the comptroller shall register the
contract within ten days of receipt of the mayor's response.



   d.   The requirements of this section shall not apply to



      (1)   an emergency contract awarded pursuant to section three
hundred fifteen or to an accelerated procurement as defined under section
three hundred twenty-six, provided that the agency shall, as soon as is
practicable, submit any such contract to the comptroller for an audit of the
procedures and basis for the determination of the need for an emergency or
accelerated procurement, or



      (2)   a contract awarded pursuant to this chapter for the
provision of goods, services or construction that is not to be paid for out
of the city treasury or out of moneys under the control of the city, provided
that the board of the entity awarding such a contract shall within ten days
of awarding contract, file a copy of such contract and any related materials
specified by the mayor, with the mayor or the mayor's designee for purposes
of section three hundred thirty-four of this charter.



Section 329. By whom procured.



   a.   All services to be performed by contract, including the
furnishing of goods incident thereto, shall be obtained by the agency for
whose use the appropriation therefor shall have been made, except as
otherwise provided by law or by rule of the procurement policy board.



   b.   All other goods shall be purchased or procured by the
department of citywide administrative services, except as otherwise provided
pursuant to this chapter or other law.



   c.   Pursuant to rules of the procurement policy board and subject
to other sections of this chapter, each agency may purchase directly goods in
an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars for each transaction or, with
the prior approval of the commissioner of citywide administrative services,
in an amount not to exceed five thousand dollars for each transaction. The
limitation of this subdivision shall not apply to purchases by an agency
under a vendor contract entered into by the commissioner of general services.



   d.   The dollar limits for direct agency purchases without the prior
approval of the commissioner of citywide administrative services pursuant to
subdivision c of this section may be raised to five thousand dollars for each
transaction for any or all agencies by the commissioner of citywide
administrative services with the approval of the mayor. Any proposed
increases in the limits for such purchases above five thousand dollars shall
be subject to the further approval of the comptroller. Any increase in dollar
limits pursuant to this subdivision shall be published in the City Record and
may be rescinded by the commissioner of citywide administrative services, the
mayor, or the comptroller.



   e.   Subject to the approval of the comptroller, a specific
procurement of a specific good may be delegated by the commissioner of
citywide administrative services, in the best interest of the city, to any
agency for direct purchase by such agency, and shall not be subject to the
provisions of subdivisions b, c or d of this section; provided, however, that
such delegation shall not be made for goods that are to be generally used by
city agencies.



Section 330. Inspection.



   Inspection and acceptance or rejection of all deliveries of goods shall
be made by the agency that makes the direct purchase other than under a
vendor contract. The commissioner of citywide administrative services may
authorize an agency to which delivery is made to perform such functions on
purchases made by the department of citywide administrative services subject
to standards and policies of the commissioner. The comptroller may continue
to perform such inspectional duties as are necessary for auditing purposes,
including ascertainment of whether items purchased and paid for by the
department of citywide administrative services or other agencies have been
received and put to use by agencies.



Section 331. Specifications.



   All purchases shall be based upon specifications which are definite and
certain, which permit of competition and which shall not be at variance with
standard specifications for the various classes of goods approved by the
commissioner of citywide administrative services. Before adopting standard
specifications the commissioner shall obtain and consider the recommendations
of agencies using the items to be standardized.



Section 332. Payments procedure.



   a.   Electronic voucher processing. All city agencies and
departments shall, to the extent practicable and consistent with operational
and fiscal needs, develop and implement programs to accept vouchers by
electronic means.



   b.   The procurement policy board shall promulgate rules for the
expeditious processing of payment vouchers by city agencies and departments
including (i) the maximum amount of time allowed for the processing and
payment of such vouchers from the later of (a) the date such vouchers are
received by the agency, or (b) the date on which the goods, services or
construction to which the voucher relates have been received and accepted by
the agency, (ii) a program for the payment of interest, at a uniform rate, to
vendors on vouchers not paid within the maximum amount of time pursuant to
clause i of this subdivision, (iii) a process for the allocation and charging
of any such interest payments to the budget of the agency responsible for the
delay leading to the interest payments and (iv) agency reporting on the
promptness of such payments in such form and containing such information as
the board shall prescribe. The board shall coordinate and publish such agency
prompt payment reports. Such rules shall facilitate the development and
implementation of programs pursuant to subdivision a of this section.



(Am. L.L. 2017/192, 10/16/2017, eff. 12/15/2017)



Section 333. Evaluation and monitoring of contractor performance.



   a.   Each agency letting contracts shall monitor the performance of
every contractor. Information with resxpect to contractor performance shall
be maintained in a central place in accordance with subdivision c of section
three hundred thirty-four.



   b.   1.   If a borough president determines there is reason to
believe a term or condition of a contract providing for the delivery of
services in the borough is not being complied with and that the contract
should be terminated for noncompliance, modified, not renewed, modified at
the time of renewal, or that the existing terms of the contract should be
enforced, the borough president shall document in writing the reasons for
that determination and present such determination, with a recommendation for
appropriate action, to the agency head for review. In the case of a
recommendation that a contract should not be renewed or should be modified at
the time of renewal, such recommendation shall be made to the agency head at
least one hundred and twenty days prior to the expiration of the contract.



      2.   The agency head shall respond to the borough president's
findings within ten days from receipt of such findings, indicating what
action, if any, shall be taken. If such action is not satisfactory to the
borough president, the borough president shall, within thirty days of receipt
of such responses, be authorized to require that a hearing be held in the
borough by a contract performance panel consisting of the public advocate,
the comptroller and the mayor, or their designees, to receive the testimony
of the borough president and other interested persons on the borough
president's recommendations. The hearing shall be held within twenty days
from the borough president's request for the hearing. The head of the agency
which procured the services in question, or designee of such agency head, and
the contractor whose performance is being evaluated, shall have the right,
and it shall be their duty when requested by the panel to appear and be heard.



      3.   The panel shall recommend, within thirty days of the date
of such hearing, such action as it deems appropriate and shall promptly
deliver its recommendations in writing to the agency head, borough president
and contractor. Within thirty days of receipt of the panel's recommendation,
the agency head shall respond in writing to the panel and the borough
president, indicating which of the panel's recommendations shall be acted
upon and what, if any, alternative action will be taken.



      4.   In the case of any contract regarding which more than one
borough president has submitted a determination in accordance with paragraph
one of this subdivision, the agency receiving such determinations shall
notify each such borough president of the agency response submitted in
accordance with paragraph two of this subdivision. A hearing, if any, held
shall include the comments of all such borough presidents.



Section 334. Information on city contracts.



   a.   Agency contract files. Each agency shall maintain files
containing information pertaining to the solicitation, award and management
of each contract of the agency in accordance with standard record maintenance
requirements established pursuant to section three thousand four of this
charter. The agency contract files shall contain copies of each
determination, writing or filing required by this chapter pertaining to a
contract and such information as is prescribed by rule of the procurement
policy board, in such form as is prescribed by the procurement policy board.
Agency contract files shall be open to the public inspection with adequate
protection for information which is confidential.



   b.   Requests by elected officials for contract documentation.
Whenever an elected official of the city requests documentation relating to
the solicitation or award of any city contract, the mayor and city agencies
shall promptly provide such documentation as is requested or shall promptly
respond to the requesting official with reason why such documentation cannot
be provided. If the mayor or agency is unable to provide the requested
documentation within ten business days of the day the request is received,
the mayor or agency shall within such time deliver to the requesting official
a statement of the reasons the documentation can not be promptly provided and
shall include in such statement a timetable within which the documentation
will be provided, not to exceed thirty days from the date of the original
request.



   c.   Centralized contract and contractor information. The mayor
shall ensure that copies of city contracts and other standard information
regarding city contracts and contractors are reasonably available for public
inspection in accordance with provisions of section one thousand sixty-four
of this charter.



Section 335. Centralized evaluation of contractor integrity, performance, and
capability.



   a.   The mayor may evaluate the integrity, performance, and
capability of entities that contract with the city, are seeking to contract
with the city, or may seek to contract with the city. The mayor may designate
one or more agencies to participate in such efforts. The evaluations of the
mayor and any agency designated by the mayor may include conclusions
regarding whether the entity should be considered a responsible contractor.
The mayor and any agency designated by the mayor may make such evaluations
and conclusions available to agencies and the public through a centralized
data base.



   b.   Where evaluation pursuant to subdivision a of this section or
other applicable rules and procedures includes a determination by the
department of investigation of whether an entity that contracts with the
city, seeks to contract with the city, or may seek to contract with the city,
or any individual affiliated with such entity, is currently or has ever been,
within a relevant timeframe the subject of an investigation by such
department, such department shall, to the extent practicable, submit such
determination to the relevant agency at least 30 days prior to the
anticipated commencement of the contract. However, such department may
exercise its discretion with respect to the release of information that may
affect the integrity of an ongoing investigation or may be subject to
confidentiality requirements imposed by law or agreements with other law
enforcement agencies. Such department shall provide an explanation to an
agency if its review is not completed within thirty calendar days of the
request. This subdivision shall not be construed to create a private right of
action in relation to its provisions.



(Am. L.L. 2018/044, 1/11/2018, eff. 5/11/2018)



Chapter 13-A: Office Of Economic and Financial Opportunity [Repealed]



 



Chapter 13-B: Office Of Labor Services [Repealed]



 



Chapter 14: Franchises, Revocable Consents and Concessions



Section 362. Definitions.



   For the purposes of this charter:



      a.   "Concession" shall mean a grant made by an agency for the
private use of city-owned property for which the city receives compensation
other than in the form of a fee to cover administrative costs, except that
concessions shall not include franchises, revocable consents and leases.



      b.   "Franchise" shall mean a grant by an agency of a right to
occupy or use the inalienable property of the city to provide a public
service.



      c.   "Responsible Agency" shall mean (1) with respect to a
franchise, the agency designated by the mayor pursuant to section three
hundred sixty-three or three hundred seventy-eight as the agency having
primary expertise and responsibility for the type of franchise involved, (2)
with respect to a revocable consent, the agency authorized to grant a
revocable consent of the type involved pursuant to section three hundred
sixty-four, or (3) with respect to a concession, the agency granting a
concession.



      d.   "Revocable Consent" shall mean a grant by the city of a
right, revocable at will, (1) to any person to construct and use for private
use pipes, conduits and tunnels under, railroad tracks upon, and connecting
bridges over inalienable property, (2) to an owner of real property or, with
the consent of the owner, to a tenant of real property to use adjacent
inalienable property for such purposes as may be permitted by rules of the
department of transportation or the department of information technology and
telecommunications or (3) to a public service corporation for facilities
ancillary to, but not within, a franchise granted prior to the effective date
of this section.



Section 363. Franchises.



   a.   Franchises shall be awarded only in accordance with the
provisions of an authorizing resolution adopted by the council pursuant to
the provisions of this section.



   b.   An initial determination of the need for franchises of a
particular type shall be made by the head of the agency designated by the
mayor as having the primary expertise and responsibility in the policy area
covered by that type of franchise. Upon making such a determination, such
agency, with the advice of the corporation counsel and such other agencies as
the mayor shall determine, shall prepare a proposed authorizing resolution
for that type of franchise and shall submit such proposed authorizing
resolution to the mayor. Such a proposed authorizing resolution shall set
forth the nature of the franchise or franchises to be granted, the public
service to be provided, the terms and conditions of the franchise or
franchises, including any subsidies that will be given to a franchisee, the
method by which proposals will be solicited for the franchise or franchises
and the criteria to be used in evaluating the proposals submitted in response
to such a solicitation.



   c.   The mayor may submit such a proposed authorizing resolution to
the council. Promptly upon submission to the council, the text of any such
authorizing resolution shall be published in the City Record. Within ninety
days of receiving such a proposed resolution, the council or a committee of
the council shall hold a public hearing on such resolution. The council may
approve, approve with modifications or disapprove such resolution by majority
vote. Any action of the council approving a modification to a proposed
authorizing resolution or disapproving a proposed authorizing resolution
shall be subject to the disapproval of the mayor in the same manner as a
local law which is passed by the council, and any such disapproval shall be
subject to reconsideration, repassing and adoption, notwithstanding the
objections of the mayor, in the same manner as a local law which is
disapproved by the mayor. The council may on its own initiative amend an
authorizing resolution. The procedure for council review and approval of such
a proposed amendment shall be the same as for an authorizing resolution.



   d.   No authorizing resolution or other action of the council may
provide for any involvement by the council or any member of the council in
the selection of a franchise pursuant to such resolution.



   e.   Pursuant to an authorizing resolution adopted by the council,
the responsible agency may issue one or more requests for proposals or other
solicitations of proposals, provided that (1) the corporation counsel shall
have determined that the request for proposals is consistent with the
provisions of the authorizing resolution and (2) no such request or
solicitation shall be issued unless either the department of city planning
has determined that the proposed franchise would not have land use impacts or
implications or such request or solicitation has been reviewed and approved
pursuant to section one hundred ninety-seven-c and section one hundred
ninety-seven-d. A community board may waive a public hearing and the
preparation of a written recommendation with respect to any such request for
proposals or solicitation which in its judgment does not involve a
substantial land use interest. Any such request for proposals or solicitation
issued in accordance with this subdivision shall set forth the criteria and
procedures to be utilized in evaluating the proposals submitted in response
to such request or solicitation.



   f.   The selection of a franchisee shall be in accordance with the
provisions of the authorizing resolution covering franchises of the type
involved. Each such selection and each franchise agreement shall be subject
to the review and approval of the franchise and concession review committee
pursuant to sections three hundred seventy-one, three hundred seventy-two and
three hundred seventy-three.



   g.   Nothing in this section shall preclude any agency, prior to
proposing an authorizing resolution, from issuing one or more requests for
information or other solicitations of information regarding the availability
of potential franchisees with expertise in the subject matter of a proposed
type of franchise, suggestions regarding the appropriate terms and conditions
which should be contained in an authorizing resolution for that type of
franchise or any other information which would assist the agency in
determining how to proceed with regard to the public service involved.



   h.   All franchises shall be consistent with the following
requirements:



      (1)   Every grant of a franchise or modification thereof must
be by written agreement approved by the franchise and concession review
committee and executed by the responsible agency under the authority of an
authorizing resolution adopted by the council in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.



      (2)   No such agreement shall be for a longer period than
twenty-five years except that in the case of a tunnel railroad it may be for
a period not exceeding fifty years.



      (3)   The agreement may, at the option of the city, provide
for giving to the grantee the right of renewals not exceeding in the
aggregate twenty-five years on a fair redetermination of the compensation to
the city to be made upon standards and methods as therein specified.



      (4)   At the termination of such agreement all the rights or
property of the grantee in the inalienable property of the city to which the
franchise relates shall cease without compensation.



      (5)   Any such agreement may provide that upon its termination
the property, plant and equipment of the grantee shall, to the extent therein
specified, thereupon be and become the property of the city, either without
compensation to the grantee or on payment to the grantee of the fair value
thereof as property, to be determined as provided in the contract, but
excluding any value derived from the franchise. The city shall have the
option either to take and operate on its own account the property, plant and
equipment when so acquired, or to lease the same for a term not exceeding
twenty years or to require that the property of the city be restored to its
condition prior to the granting of the franchise.



      (6)   Every agreement granting a franchise for the performance
of any public service shall contain an agreement by the grantee to recognize
the right of its employees to bargain collectively through representatives of
their own choosing, and at all times to recognize and deal with the
representatives duly designated or selected by the majority of its employees
for the purpose of collective bargaining in respect to rates of pay, wages,
hours of employment or other conditions of employment and not to dominate,
interfere with or participate in the management or control of or give
financial support to any union or association of its employees. This
subdivision shall not apply to a contract providing for a modification or
amendment of or extension of service under a franchise not containing a
similar provision, provided that the term of such franchise is not extended
thereby.



Section 364. Revocable consents.



   a.   A revocable consent shall not be granted for a use that would
interfere with the use of inalienable property of the city for public
purposes, nor shall a revocable consent be granted for a purpose for which a
franchise may be granted.



   b.   All revocable consents shall be revocable at any time by the
responsible agency, shall be granted for a fixed term, and shall provide for
adequate compensation to be annually provided to the city during the
continuance of the consent.



   c.   Revocable consents, other than for telecommunications purposes,
may be granted by the department of transportation with respect to property
under its jurisdiction or by such other agency as may be authorized by law to
grant revocable consents. Revocable consents for telecommunications purposes
may be granted by the department of information technology and
telecommunications. All revocable consents shall require the approval of the
department of transportation.



   d.   Every petition for the grant of a revocable consent shall be
filed with the department of transportation. Each petition shall state the
location of the proposed revocable consent and shall be in such form and
contain such other information as the department of transportation and other
responsible agencies, if any, shall require by rule. Petitions for each type
of revocable consent shall be distributed to and reviewed by the agencies
required to do so by local law or executive order of the mayor. If, in the
judgment of the department of city planning, a proposed revocable consent has
land use impacts or implications, the petition for the proposed revocable
consent shall be subject to review and approval pursuant to section one
hundred ninety-seven-c and section one hundred ninety-seven-d.



   e.   Notwithstanding any provision of this charter or the
administrative code, revocable consents to construct and operate sidewalk
cafes shall be reviewed pursuant to subchapter six of chapter two of title
twenty of the administrative code.



Section 365. Terms of agreements; enforcement.



   a.   Every agreement memorializing the terms and conditions of a
franchise, revocable consent or concession shall contain adequate provisions
by way of forfeiture or otherwise (1) to secure efficiency of public service
at reasonable rates, if a public service is to be provided, (2) to assure the
maintenance of the property of the city in good condition throughout the term
of the agreement, and (3) to provide for adequate compensation to the city.



   b.   Every agreement memorializing the terms and conditions of a
franchise, revocable consent or concession shall contain an agreement by the
grantee that it will (1) permit the placement or display of the public health
messages required by section 17-707 of the code, on any property subject to
such franchise, revocable consent or concession, or any facility, plant,
equipment or other property used in connection with such franchise, revocable
consent or concession; and (2) bear any costs associated with the posting of
such public health messages and any costs in terms of foregone advertising
revenues associated with the placement or display of such public health
messages.



   c.   The responsible agency shall also monitor the performance of
the grantee and enforce the terms and conditions of any franchise, revocable
consent or concession under its jurisdiction.



Section 371. Public hearing on proposed agreement; publication of notice.



   The franchise and concession review committee in the case of a
franchise, or the responsible agency in the case of a revocable consent,
shall hold a public hearing on the proposed agreement memorializing the terms
and conditions of each proposed franchise or revocable consent before final
approval of the proposed franchise or consent. Any such public hearing
conducted by the franchise and concession review committee shall be held
within thirty days of the filing with the committee by the responsible agency
of a proposed agreement containing the terms and conditions of the proposed
franchise. No hearing held by the franchise and concession review committee
or by the responsible agency shall be held until after notice thereof and a
summary of the terms and conditions of the proposed agreement shall have been
published for at least fifteen days, except Sundays and legal holidays,
immediately prior thereto in the City Record, nor until a notice of such
hearing, indicating the place where copies of the proposed agreement may be
obtained by all those interested therein, shall have been published at least
twice at the expense of the proposed grantee in a daily newspaper designated
by the mayor which is published in the city of New York and having a
circulation in the borough or boroughs in which the affected property of the
city is located and a weekly newspaper or newspapers designated by the mayor
which are published in the city of New York and have a circulation in the
community district or districts in which the affected property of the city is
located. In the event a franchise or revocable consent relates to property of
the city located in more than one borough, notice of hearing in a weekly
newspaper shall not be required; however, in that event, notice of hearing in
two daily newspapers, and mailing by the grantee, no later than fifteen days
immediately prior to the date of the public hearing, of such notice to the
borough presidents and community boards and council members in whose
districts the affected property of the city is located, shall be required. In
the case of a franchise for a bus route which crosses one or more borough
boundaries, notice of hearing in a weekly newspaper shall not be required;
however, in that event, notice of hearing in two daily newspapers, and
mailing by the grantee, no later than fifteen days immediately prior to the
date of the public hearing, of such notice to the borough presidents and
community boards and council members in whose districts the bus route is
located, and posting of such notice in the buses operating upon such route,
shall be required.



Section 372. Powers of the mayor.



   a.   The separate and additional approval of the mayor shall be
necessary to the validity of every franchise agreement and revocable consent
agreement.



   b.   Every such agreement shall before it takes effect be presented,
duly certified, to the mayor for approval. Such agreement shall not be
effective unless approved by the mayor within sixty days after it is
presented to the mayor.



Section 373. Franchise and concession review committee.



   a.   A franchise and concession review committee is hereby
established. The committee shall consist of the following officials or their
designees: the mayor, who shall serve as chair; the director of the office of
management and budget; the corporation counsel; the comptroller; and one
additional appointee of the mayor. Whenever the committee reviews a proposed
franchise or concession or the procedures for granting a particular
concession, the borough president of the borough in which such franchise or
concession is located or his or her designee shall also serve as a member of
the committee. If such a franchise, concession or procedure relates to more
than one borough, the borough presidents of such boroughs shall designate one
of such borough presidents or another individual to serve as a member of the
committee for the purpose of considering such matter.



   b.   The mayor shall designate a public officer or employee to act
as the clerk of the committee who shall be responsible for maintaining the
records and minutes of the committee and performing such other duties as may
be required.



   c.   The committee shall act by the affirmative vote of at least
four members except that the affirmative vote of at least five members shall
be required to approve a franchise agreement.



   d.   The committee shall:



      (1)   adopt rules establishing procedures for granting
concessions through public bidding or by other means designed to ensure a
competitive and fair process;



      (2)   review and approve the granting of concessions that are
proposed to be granted pursuant to procedures that differ from the procedures
established by the rules of the committee; provided, however, that the
committee need not review awards of concessions that are not subject to
renewal and have a term of less than thirty days;



      (3)   determine whether each franchise agreement proposed by a
city agency is consistent with the request for proposal or other solicitation
pursuant to which such agreement was negotiated and require appropriate
modifications to any such agreements to correct any significant
inconsistencies; and



      (4)   review and approve the selection of franchisees pursuant
to subdivision f of section three hundred sixty-three.



Section 374. Concessions.



   a.   No city agency shall grant a concession without either
complying with the procedures established by the franchise and concession
review committee or obtaining the approval of the committee prior to granting
the concession.



   b.   The city planning commission shall adopt rules that either list
major concessions or establish a procedure for determining whether a
concession is a major concession. A "major concession" shall mean a
concession that has significant land use impacts and implications, as
determined by the commission, or for which the preparation of an
environmental impact statement is required by law. All major concessions
shall be subject to review and approval pursuant to section one hundred
ninety-seven-c and section one hundred ninety-seven-d.



Section 375. Registration with the comptroller.



   All agreements memorializing the terms of franchises, revocable
consents or concessions shall be agreements subject to the applicable
registration requirements and other provisions of section three hundred
twenty-eight except that the terms "vendor" and "contractor" as used in
section three hundred twenty-eight shall be deemed to apply to the holders of
franchises, revocable consents and concessions.



Section 376. Central file.



   Copies of all franchise and revocable consent agreements shall be filed
with the department of transportation. The department of transportation shall
compile and keep up to date a listing of all current franchises and revocable
consents which shall be available to the public and shall include the date,
terms, names of the parties, description of the permitted use and location of
each franchise and revocable consent. Such listing shall be arranged and
indexed so as to enable a member of the public to determine what current
franchises and revocable consents involving use or occupancy of streets and
sidewalks have been granted for any location in the city and the identity of
the holder of each such franchise or revocable consent.



Section 377. Bureau of Franchises.



   The bureau of franchises shall be discontinued as of the first day of
July, nineteen hundred ninety. The records and staff of the bureau of
franchises shall be transferred to the department of transportation, except
that the records and staff of the bureau relating to telecommunications
franchises shall be transferred to the department of telecommunications and
the records relating to energy shall be transferred to such agency as the
mayor shall designate.



Section 378. Transition.



   a.   All franchises, revocable consents and concessions granted
prior to the effective date of this section shall remain in full force and
effect for the terms which they were granted.



   b.   Not later than the first day of March, nineteen hundred ninety,
the mayor shall designate a single agency as the responsible agency for each
type of franchise currently granted by the city. If such an agency intends to
continue granting any such type of franchise, the agency shall submit to the
council a proposed authorizing resolution for such type of franchise at least
two years, or such shorter period as may be approved by the franchise and
concession review committee, prior to the earliest expiration date of any
existing franchise of that type; provided, however, that the department of
transportation, with the approval of the franchise and concession review
committee, may extend the expiration date of the operating authority of any
private bus company that does not receive a subsidy from the city to a date
not later than the thirtieth day of June, two thousand and eleven.
Notwithstanding the provisions of section three hundred seventy-one, the
public notice and hearing requirements of the franchise and concession review
committee with respect to an approval of an extension of the operating
authority of a private bus company shall be fully satisfied by a public
hearing held after notice of such hearing shall have been published at least
one day prior thereto in the City Record.



Chapter 15: Property of the City



Section 381. Authority to acquire real property.



   The city may acquire title in fee to real property or any interest
therein whenever required for any public or municipal use or purpose or for
the promotion of public utility, comfort, health, enjoyment or adornment.
Such title or interest shall be acquired according to law by purchase,
condemnation or otherwise.



Section 382. Notice to owners of proceeding to acquire property.



   In addition to all other requirements of law, written notice of the
application to have compensation for real property ascertained in any
proceeding brought by the city to acquire title to real property shall be
given by the corporation counsel to the owners of all property affected by
the proceeding at least ten days prior to such application, by mailing the
same to such owners at the address registered or filed with the commissioner
of finance for the purpose of forwarding to them bills for taxes, assessments
and frontage water rates. Such notice shall state the purpose for which the
property is to be acquired and the date when such application will be
presented and shall contain a copy of such application. Upon request by the
corporation counsel, the commissioner of finance shall furnish a certified
list of the registered or filed names and addresses of such owners. Failure
to comply with the directions contained in this section shall not invalidate
or affect the proceeding.



Section 383. Inalienable property.



   The rights of the city in and to its water front, ferries, wharf
property, bridges, land under water, public landings, wharves, docks,
streets, avenues, highways, parks, waters, waterways and all other public
places are hereby declared to be inalienable; but upon the closing or
discontinuance of any street, avenue, park or other public place, the
property may be sold or otherwise disposed of as may be provided by law, and
leases of land under water, wharf property, wharves, docks and piers may be
made as may be provided by law. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the
granting of franchises, permits and licenses in respect to inalienable
property.



Section 384. Disposal of property of the city.



   a.   No real property of the city may be sold, leased, exchanged or
otherwise disposed of except with the approval of the mayor and as may be
provided by law unless such power is expressly vested by law in another
agency.



   b.   Except as otherwise specifically provided by law:



      1.   The mayor may authorize the sale or lease only for the
highest marketable price or rental, at public auction or by sealed bids and
after advertisement for at least thirty days in the City Record, of any real
property belonging to the city or any interest therein. No such sale or lease
shall be authorized until a public hearing has been held with respect to such
sale or lease after the publication of notice in the City Record at least
thirty days in advance of such hearing. No such lease shall run for a term
longer than ninety-nine years. Any conveyance or lease may provide for the
restriction of the use of such real property.



      2.   Real property of the city may be leased only after
appraisal made within six months prior to the authorization of the lease by
the mayor, provided, however, that advertisement for a public auction or for
sealed bids shall be commenced within sixty days of such authorization.



      3.   Real property of the city may be sold only after
appraisal made within six months prior to the authorization of the sale and
after a review of such appraisal by the department of citywide administrative
services within thirty days prior to authorization of the sale, provided that
advertisement for the public auction for such sale shall be commenced within
sixty days of such authorization.



      4.   Notwithstanding the provisions of this charter, or any
general, special, or local law to the contrary, the mayor may, with the
approval of a majority of the members of the borough board of the borough in
which such real property is located, lease or sell any real property of the
city, except inalienable property or any interest therein, to a local
development corporation without competitive bidding and for such purpose or
purposes and at such rental or for such price as may be determined by the
mayor to be in the public interest, and no such lease shall run for a term
longer than ninety-nine years.



      4-a.   Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph one of this
subdivision, the mayor may, without public auction or sealed bids, authorize
the sale of real property of the city, except inalienable property or any
interest therein, that cannot be independently developed, directly to private
owners of abutting property, and/or an entity or entities comprised thereof.
The consideration for a sale of real property pursuant to this paragraph
shall be the fair market value of such parcel as determined by appraisal. For
purposes of this paragraph, real property that cannot be independently
developed shall mean property that cannot be developed due to its size,
shape, applicable zoning, configuration or topography, which factors, singly
or in combination, render the development of such property economically
impracticable or infeasible. No such sale directly to private property owners
shall take place without a public auction or sealed bids (i) unless a finding
by the mayor, based on a certification by the commissioner of citywide
administrative services that independent development is economically
impracticable or infeasible, has been made that such sale is in the best
interests of the city, and (ii) until a public hearing has been held with
respect to such sale after the publication of notice in the City Record at
least thirty days in advance of such hearing, and (iii) at least thirty days
in advance of such hearing, a copy of the aforesaid notice in the City Record
has been mailed to each abutting property owner accompanied by a statement
that the real property to be sold without auction abuts such property owner's
property. Any conveyance may provide for the restriction of the use of such
real property. Nothing in this paragraph exempts dispositions of real
property to abutting owners (and/or an entity or entities comprised thereof)
from any applicable review and approval requirements set forth in sections
one hundred ninety-seven-c and one hundred ninety-seven-d of this charter.



      5.   Any application for the sale, lease (other than lease of
office space), exchange or other disposition of real property of the city
shall be subject to review and approval pursuant to sections one hundred
ninety-seven-c and one hundred ninety-seven-d. Such review shall be limited
to the land use impact and implications of the proposed transaction.



         (a)   A community board may waive the conduct of a
public hearing and the preparation of a written recommendation with respect
to any proposed lease of property which in the judgment of the board does not
involve a substantial land use interest.



         (b)   The city planning commission may waive a public
hearing on any application involving a lease of property.



Editor's note: paragraph 4-a. of sudivision b. was added to this section 384
by 2010 N.Y. Laws Ch. 548. Section 2 of that legislation, as amended by 2015
N.Y. Laws Ch. 505, provides that "This act shall . . . expire December 31,
2020, when upon such date the provisions of this act shall be deemed
repealed."



Chapter 16: Heads of Mayoral Agencies



Section 385. Heads of mayoral agencies.



   a.   This chapter shall apply to heads of agencies holding office
upon appointment of the mayor and to heads of those units within the
executive office of the mayor designated by the mayor to be covered by the
provisions of the chapter. It shall not apply to agencies headed by boards,
commissions, or other multi-member bodies whether appointed by the mayor or
otherwise, nor to elected officials, nor to other agencies the heads of which
are appointed by officials other than the mayor or by multi-member bodies.
References in this chapter to other sections of the charter shall not be
construed to affect the applicability of those sections to officials and
agencies not subject to this chapter.



   b.   Except as otherwise provided by law, all functions, powers and
duties assigned to each mayoral agency by the charter or other law shall be
vested in the head of such agency. In exercising such powers and duties and
the powers and duties specifically assigned to the agency head, such official
shall exercise due diligence in ensuring their faithful execution,
enforcement and performance. In addition to the powers and duties granted to
them and their agencies by the charter or by other law, and in addition to
such other functions as are assigned to them by the mayor, heads of mayoral
agencies shall have the powers and duties listed in the remaining sections of
this chapter.



Section 386. Planning, advising, coordinating activities.



   a.   In the areas under their jurisdiction, heads of mayoral
agencies shall have the power and duty to (1) review, analyze, and evaluate
the needs of the city; (2) prepare and submit to the mayor and other
appropriate governmental authorities short term, intermediate, and long range
plans and programs to meet the needs of the city; (3) develop, implement, and
maintain systems to collect, store, and disseminate data; and (4) conduct
research and studies to aid in planning and developing policies and programs.



   b.   Heads of mayoral agencies shall advise and assist the mayor,
other elected officials and bodies of elected officials in regard to matters
under the jurisdiction of their agencies.



   c.   To the maximum extent feasible, heads of mayoral agencies shall
coordinate the activities of their agencies with those of other city, state,
and federal agencies and other organizations and institutions on matters
within their jurisdiction by such means as the mayor may require and, when
not inconsistent with mayoral directives, by such means as the agency head
may deem appropriate, including by establishing and participating in
coordinating committees.



Section 387. Program management.



   a.   The heads of mayoral agencies shall supervise the execution and
management of all programs and activities of their respective agencies and
shall have cognizance and control of the government, administration, and
discipline of their agencies.



   b.   Heads of mayoral agencies shall determine standards for, and
monitor, evaluate, and exercise general supervision over, all services and
facilities under their jurisdiction. To the extent necessary to carry out the
provisions of the charter and other applicable law, and when not inconsistent
with any other law, heads of mayoral agencies shall have the power and duty
to visit and inspect providers of services under their jurisdiction.



Section 388. Financial management.



   a.   The heads of mayoral agencies shall supervise the execution and
management of all expenditures of their respective agencies.



   b.   They shall prepare and transmit budget estimates of the agency
as prescribed by the charter, and other laws, and fulfill all other
requirements of the budget preparation, adoption, modification, and
administration process as set forth in the charter.



   c.   In accordance with the methods prescribed by the comptroller
pursuant to subdivision h of section ninety-three of the charter and subject
to the comptroller's power to suspend or withdraw such authority in
accordance with the provisions of that subdivision, heads of mayoral agencies
shall prepare and audit vouchers before payment, prepare and audit payrolls,
receive and inspect goods and forward bills to the comptroller for payment
and record, report and account for such payments.



   d.   In accordance with the standards and procedures prescribed by
the comptroller pursuant to subdivision m of section ninety-three, heads of
mayoral agencies shall maintain a system of uniform accounting and reporting
for their agencies.



Section 389. Internal controls, rule-making, contracting.



   a.   In accordance with the policies and procedures established by
the mayor for this purpose, heads of mayoral agencies shall maintain an
internal control environment and system which is intended to maximize the
effectiveness and integrity of agency operations and to reduce the
vulnerability of the agency to fraud, waste, abuse, error, conflict of
interest, and corruption.



   b.   Except as otherwise provided by law and in accordance with the
provisions of the charter and other law, heads of mayoral agencies shall have
the power to adopt rules to carry out the powers and duties delegated to the
agency head or the agency by or pursuant to federal, state or local law.



   c.   Heads of mayoral agencies may, subject to the requirements of
the charter, other law, and rules promulgated pursuant to them, and within
appropriations therefor, enter into contracts and make purchases to fulfill
the duties assigned to them.



Section 390. Powers and duties specified in other charter chapters.



   Heads of mayoral agencies shall, in addition to the duties assigned to
them by this chapter, fulfill all other powers and duties assigned to them by
the charter or other law.



Chapter 17: Law Department



Section 391. Department; corporation counsel.



   There shall be a law department the head of which shall be the
corporation counsel.



Section 392. Assistants.



   a.   The corporation counsel may appoint a first assistant
corporation counsel and such other assistants as may be necessary within the
appropriation therefor.



   b.   The first assistant corporation counsel shall, during the
absence or disability of the corporation counsel, possess all the powers and
perform all the duties of the corporation counsel and in case of the death or
the corporation counsel or of a vacancy in that office shall act as
corporation counsel until the appointment and qualification of a corporation
counsel.



   c.   Any assistant shall, in addition to the duties regularly
assigned to him or her, possess such of the powers and perform such of the
duties of the corporation counsel as the corporation counsel shall empower
such assistant to exercise by written authority filed and remaining on record
in the department.



Section 393. Offices.



   The corporation counsel may maintain an office in each of the boroughs
or any of them.



Section 394. Powers and duties.



   a.   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or other law, the
corporation counsel shall be attorney and counsel for the city and every
agency thereof and shall have charge and conduct of all the law business of
the city and its agencies and in which the city is interested.



   b.   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or other law, the
corporation counsel shall have charge and conduct of the legal proceedings
necessary in opening, widening, altering and closing streets and in acquiring
real estate or interests therein for the city by condemnation proceedings,
and the preparation of all leases, deeds, contracts, bonds, and other legal
papers of the city, or of or connected with any agency or officer thereof,
and the corporation counsel shall approve as to form all such deeds and bonds
and, individually or by standard type of class, all contracts, leases and
other legal papers.



   c.   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or other law, the
corporation counsel shall have the right to institute actions in law or
equity and any proceedings provided by law in any court, local, state or
national, to maintain, defend and establish the rights, interests, revenues,
property, privileges, franchises or demands of the city or of any part or
portion thereof, or of the people thereof, or to collect any money, debts,
fines or penalties or to enforce the laws. The corporation counsel shall not
be empowered to compromise, settle or adjust any rights, claims, demands, or
causes of action in favor of or against the city, and shall not permit, offer
or confess judgment against the city, or accept any offer of judgment in
favor of the city without the previous approval of the comptroller, except
that with regard to matters involving excise and non-property taxes, such
previous written approval shall be obtained from the finance administrator;
provided, however, that this inhibition shall not operate to limit or abridge
the discretion of the corporation counsel in regard to the proper conduct of
the trial of any action or proceeding or to deprive such corporation counsel
of the powers and privileges ordinarily exercised in the courts of litigation
by attorneys-at-law when acting for private clients.



Section 395. Legal service to agencies.



   The corporation counsel may assign an assistant or assistants to any
agency. The head of each agency, within appropriations for such purpose, may
employ staff counsel to assist in the legal affairs of the agency. No officer
or agency, except as provided in this chapter or otherwise especially
provided, shall have or employ any attorney or counsel, except where a
judgment or order in an action or proceeding may affect such officer or
agency individually or may be followed by a motion to commit for contempt of
court, in which case such officer or agency may employ and be represented by
attorney or counsel at their own expense.



Section 396. Actions and proceedings for recovery of penalties.



   All actions and proceedings for the recovery of penalties for the
violation of any law shall be brought in the name of the city of New York and
not in that of any agency, except where otherwise provided by law.



Section 397. Delegation of legal authority.



   a.   The mayor may delegate to any agency, after consultation with
the corporation counsel and the head of the agency, responsibility for the
conduct of routine legal affairs of the agency subject to standards,
policies, and guidelines of the corporation counsel, and consistent with
city-wide controls and uniformity. The mayor may transfer or assign attorneys
from the law department to the agency to assist in the conduct of such
delegated functions. The corporation counsel shall monitor and evaluate on a
regular and continuous basis the exercise of authority delegated pursuant to
this section and the mayor, on recommendation of the corporation counsel, may
suspend or withdraw any delegated authority whenever in his or her judgment
the interests of the city justify such action.



   b.   Nothing contained in this section shall abrogate the authority
of the corporation counsel as attorney and counsel for the city and every
agency of the city.



Section 398. Ex parte administrative warrants.



   If entry to a location or premises to be inspected pursuant to an
agency's powers and duties is not gained on consent, or if circumstances call
for entry without prior notice, the commissioner of such agency, or his or
her authorized representative, may request the corporation counsel to make an
application, ex parte, in any court of competent jurisdiction for an order
directing the entry and inspection of such premises or location and, in
accordance with applicable law, to abate any nuisance thereon. Nothing in
this section shall be construed to limit, abridge, affect or amend the power
of an agency under law, including state, local or case law, to enter and
inspect any location or premises or abate any nuisance thereon, either with
or without a warrant, to carry out any of its functions, powers and duties.



Chapter 18: Police Department



Section 431. Department; commissioner.



   a.   There shall be a police department the head of which shall be
the police commissioner who shall be appointed by the mayor and shall, unless
sooner removed, hold office for a term of five years.



   b.   Whenever in the judgment of the mayor or the governor the
public interests shall so require, the commissioner may be removed from
office by either, and shall be ineligible for reappointment thereto.



   c.   Whenever a vacancy shall occur in the office of police
commissioner, a police commissioner shall be appointed by the mayor within
ten days thereafter.



Section 432. Deputies.



   The commissioner shall have the power to appoint and at pleasure remove
seven deputies, one to be known as first deputy commissioner. During the
absence or disability of the commissioner, the first deputy commissioner, or
if he shall be absent or under disability, the deputy commissioner designated
by the commissioner shall possess all the powers and perform all the duties
of the commissioner except the power of making appointments and transfers.



Section 433. Member of department; no other office.



Editor's note: Became Section 1129.



Section 434. Commissioner; powers and duties.



   a.   The commissioner shall have cognizance and control of the
government, administration, disposition and discipline of the department, and
of the police force of the department.



   b.   The commissioner shall be the chief executive officer of the
police force. He shall be chargeable with and responsible for the execution
of all laws and the rules and regulations of the department.



Section 435. Department; duties.



   a.   The police department and force shall have the power and it
shall be their duty to preserve the public peace, prevent crime, detect and
arrest offenders, suppress riots, mobs and insurrections, disperse unlawful
or dangerous assemblages and assemblages which obstruct the free passage of
public streets, sidewalks, parks and places; protect the rights of persons
and property, guard the public health, preserve order at elections and all
public meetings and assemblages; subject to the provisions of law and the
rules and regulations of the commissioner of traffic,* regulate, direct,
control and restrict the movement of vehicular and pedestrian traffic for the
facilitation of traffic and the convenience of the public as well as the
proper protection of human life and health; remove all nuisances in the
public streets, parks and places; arrest all street mendicants and beggars;
provide proper police attendance at fires; inspect and observe all places of
public amusement, all places of business having excise or other licenses to
carry on any business; enforce and prevent the violation of all laws and
ordinances in force in the city; and for these purposes to arrest all persons
guilty of violating any law or ordinance for the suppression or punishment of
crimes or offenses.



   b.   The provisions of law and the rules and regulations of the
commissioner of transportation relating to regulating, directing, controlling
and restricting the parking of vehicles and the movement and conduct of
vehicular and pedestrian traffic for the facilitation of traffic and the
convenience of the public as well as the proper protection of human life and
health may also be enforced by an employee of the police department.



   c.   Except as specifically provided herein, nothing contained in
this section shall be deemed to limit, restrict, divest, transfer or
supersede the powers or the jurisdiction of any agency as defined in section
eleven hundred fifty of the charter.



   d.   Nothing contained in this charter shall be deemed to grant the
department of traffic cognizance or control over the government,
administration, disposition and discipline of the police department or police
force.



Section 436. Powers over certain trades.



   The commissioner shall possess powers of general supervision and
inspection over all licensed or unlicensed pawnbrokers, vendors, junkshop
keepers, junk boatment, cartmen, dealers in second-hand merchandise and
auctioneers within the city; and in connection with the performance of any
police duties he shall have power to examine such persons, their clerks and
employees and their books, business premises, and any articles of merchandise
in their possession. A refusal or neglect to comply in any respect with the
provisions of this section on the part of any pawnbroker, vendor, junkshop
keeper, junk boatman, cartman, dealer in second-hand merchandise or
auctioneer, or any clerk or employee of any thereof shall be triable by a
judge of the criminal court and punishable by not more than thirty days'
imprisonment, or by a fine of not more than fifty dollars, or both.



Section 437. Detail to attend court.



   The commissioner is empowered to cause some intelligent and experienced
person connected with the department to attend any courts in the city in
cases where there is need of assistance, who shall, to such extent as shall
be permitted by the rules of the court, aid in proceedings pending in such
courts.



Section 438. Maintenance and operation of telegraph and telephone lines, etc.



   The commissioner shall have power to erect, operate, supply and
maintain, subject to the general laws of the state, all such lines of
telegraph and telephones and other means of communication as for the purposes
and business of the police the commissioner shall deem necessary. The
commissioner may provide all instruments, fixtures, property and materials
for the purpose above mentioned and control the same.



Section 440. Civilian complaints against members of the police department.
[Repealed]



Chapter 18-A: Civilian Complaint Review Board



Section 440. Public complaints against members of the police department.



   (a)   It is in the interest of the people of the city of New York
and the New York city police department that the investigation of complaints
concerning misconduct by officers of the department towards members of the
public be complete, thorough and impartial. These inquiries must be conducted
fairly and independently, and in a manner in which the public and the police
department have confidence. An independent civilian complaint review board is
hereby established as a body comprised solely of members of the public with
the authority to investigate allegations of police misconduct as provided in
this section.



   (b)   Civilian complaint review board.



      1.   The civilian complaint review board shall consist of
thirteen members of the public appointed by the mayor, who shall be residents
of the city of New York and shall reflect the diversity of the city's
population. The members of the board shall be appointed as follows: (i) five
members, one from each of the five boroughs, shall be designated by the city
council; (ii) three members with experience as law enforcement professionals
shall be designated by the police commissioner; and (iii) the remaining five
members shall be selected by the mayor. The mayor shall select one of the
members to be chair.



      2.   No member of the board shall hold any other public office
or employment. No members, except those designated by the police
commissioner, shall have experience as law enforcement professionals, or be
former employees of the New York city police department. For the purposes of
this section, experience as a law enforcement professional shall include
experience as a police officer, criminal investigator, special agent, or a
managerial or supervisory employee who exercised substantial policy
discretion on law enforcement matters, in a federal, state, or local law
enforcement agency, other than experience as an attorney in a prosecutorial
agency.



      3.   The members shall be appointed for terms of three years,
except that of the members first appointed, four shall be appointed for terms
of one year, of whom one shall have been designated by the council and two
shall have been designated by the police commissioner, four shall be
appointed for terms of two years, of whom two shall have been designated by
the council, and five shall be appointed for terms of three years, of whom
two shall have been designated by the council and one shall have been
designated by the police commissioner.



      4.   In the event of a vacancy on the board during the term of
office of a member by reason of removal, death, resignation, or otherwise, a
successor shall be chosen in the same manner as the original appointment. A
member appointed to fill a vacancy shall serve for the balance of the
unexpired term.



   (c)   Powers and duties of the board.



      1.   The board shall have the power to receive, investigate,
hear, make findings and recommend action upon complaints by members of the
public against members of the police department that allege misconduct
involving excessive use of force, abuse of authority, discourtesy, or use of
offensive language, including, but not limited to, slurs relating to race,
ethnicity, religion, gender, sexual orientation and disability. The findings
and recommendations of the board, and the basis therefor, shall be submitted
to the police commissioner. No finding or recommendation shall be based
solely upon an unsworn complaint or statement, nor shall prior
unsubstantiated, unfounded or withdrawn complaints be the basis for any such
finding or recommendation.



      2.   The board shall promulgate rules of procedure in
accordance with the city administrative procedure act, including rules that
prescribe the manner in which investigations are to be conducted and
recommendations made and the manner by which a member of the public is to be
informed of the status of his or her complaint. Such rules may provide for
the establishment of panels, which shall consist of not less than three
members of the board, which shall be empowered to supervise the investigation
of complaints, and to hear, make findings and recommend action on such
complaints. No such panel shall consist exclusively of members designated by
the council, or designated by the police commissioner, or selected by the
mayor.



      3.   The board, by majority vote of its members, may compel
the attendance of witnesses and require the production of such records and
other materials as are necessary for the investigation of complaints
submitted pursuant to this section.



      4.   The board shall establish a mediation program pursuant to
which a complainant may voluntarily choose to resolve a complaint by means of
informal conciliation.



      5.   The board is authorized, within appropriations available
therefor, to appoint such employees as are necessary to exercise its powers
and fulfill its duties. The board shall employ civilian investigators to
investigate all complaints.



      6.   The board shall issue to the mayor and the city council a
semi-annual report which shall describe its activities and summarize its
actions.



      7.   The board shall have the responsibility of informing the
public about the board and its duties, and shall develop and administer an
on-going program for the education of the public regarding the provisions of
this chapter.



   (d)   Cooperation of police department.



      1.   It shall be the duty of the police department to provide
such assistance as the board may reasonably request, to cooperate fully with
investigations by the board, and to provide to the board upon request records
and other materials which are necessary for the investigation of complaints
submitted pursuant to this section, except such records or materials that
cannot be disclosed by law.



      2.   The police commissioner shall ensure that officers and
employees of the police department appear before and respond to inquiries of
the board and its civilian investigators in connection with the investigation
of complaints submitted pursuant to this section, provided that such
inquiries are conducted in accordance with department procedures for
interrogation of members.



      3.   The police commissioner shall report to the board on any
action taken in cases in which the board submitted a finding or
recommendation to the police commissioner with respect to a complaint.



   (e)   The provisions of this section shall not be construed to limit
or impair the authority of the police commissioner to discipline members of
the department. Nor shall the provisions of this section be construed to
limit the rights of members of the department with respect to disciplinary
action, including but not limited to the right to notice and a hearing, which
may be established by any provision of law or otherwise.



   (f)   The provisions of this section shall not be construed to
prevent or hinder the investigation or prosecution of members of the
department for violations of law by any court of competent jurisdiction, a
grand jury, district attorney, or other authorized officer, agency or body.



Chapter 18-B: Independent Police Investigation and Audit Board



Section 450. Independent police investigation and audit board; membership.



   a.   There shall be an independent police investigation and audit
board, which shall consist of five members of the public, appointed by the
mayor, who shall be residents of the city of New York. The members of the
board shall be appointed as follows: (i) two members shall be appointed by
the mayor; (ii) two members shall be designated by the city council; and
(iii) the chair shall be appointed by the mayor after consultation with the
speaker of the council. No member of the board shall hold any other public
office or employment.



   b.   The members of the board shall be appointed for terms of three
years, except that of the members first appointed, two shall be appointed for
terms of one year, of whom one shall have been designated by the council and
one shall have been appointed by the mayor, two shall be appointed for terms
of two years, of whom one shall have been designated by the council and one
shall have been appointed by the mayor, and the chair shall be appointed for
a term of three years.



   c.   In the event of a vacancy on the board during the term of
office of a member by reason of removal, death, resignation, or otherwise, a
successor shall be chosen in the same manner as the original appointment. A
member appointed to fill a vacancy shall serve for the balance of the
unexpired term.



Section 451. Powers and duties of the board.



   a.   The board shall have the power to:



      1.   perform assessments and audits of the police department's
internal systems for detecting, investigating and preventing corruption among
uniformed and civilian members of the police department, and make
recommendations for the improvement of those systems;



      2.   make recommendations to the police department in relation
to the formulation and implementation of policies and programs to detect and
eliminate corruption;



      3.   undertake independent investigations of possible
corruption within the police department; and



      4.   undertake investigations of possible corruption within
the police department at the request of the mayor or the police commissioner.



   b.   If during the course of any assessment, audit or investigation
undertaken pursuant to subdivision a of this section, the board forms a
reasonable belief that criminal activity or other wrongdoing has occurred or
is occurring, the board shall, as soon as practicable, report the facts that
support such belief to the police commissioner and the appropriate
prosecuting attorney.



Section 452. Subpoenas.



   The board, by majority vote of its members, may compel the attendance
of witnesses and require the production of such records and other materials
as are necessary for the investigation of any matter within its jurisdiction
pursuant to this chapter. The board may designate those of its employees it
deems necessary to administer oaths and to examine persons in connection with
any such matter.



Section 453. Board staff.



   The board is authorized, within appropriations available therefor, to
appoint such employees as are necessary to exercise its powers and fulfill
its duties.



Section 454. Annual report.



   The Board shall issue to the mayor and the city council an annual
report which shall describe its activities and summarize its actions.



Section 455. Cooperation of the police department.



   a.   It shall be the duty of the police department to provide such
assistance as the board may reasonably request, to cooperate fully with
investigations by the board, and to provide to the board upon request records
and other materials which are necessary for the investigation of any matter
within its jurisdiction pursuant to this chapter, except such records or
materials that cannot be disclosed by law.



   b.   The police commissioner shall ensure that officers and
employees of the police department appear before and respond to inquiries of
the board in connection with the investigation of any matter within the
board's jurisdiction pursuant to this chapter, provided that such inquiries
are conducted in accordance with department procedures for interrogation of
members.



Section 456. Authority of the police commissioner to investigate corruption
to remain unimpaired; law enforcement agencies.



   The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to limit or
impair the authority of the police commissioner to investigate corruption
within the department, or to discipline members of the department. Nor shall
the provisions of this chapter be construed to prevent or hinder the
investigation or prosecution of members of the department for violations of
law or rules and regulations of the department by any court of competent
jurisdiction, a grand jury, district attorney, or other authorized officer,
agency or body.



Section 457. Protocols.



   a.   Police Department. Within ninety days after the appointment of
the last member of the board pursuant to section four hundred and fifty, the
board and the police commissioner shall establish a protocol pursuant to
which information shall be exchanged and cooperation between the board and
the department facilitated in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
Such protocol shall also provide for means of avoiding and resolving
potential disputes arising out of investigations independently undertaken by
both the board and the department.



   b.   District Attorneys. Within ninety days after the appointment of
the last member of the board pursuant to section four hundred and fifty, the
board shall enter into a protocol with each of the city's district attorneys
pursuant to which information shall be exchanged, cooperation between the
board and the district attorneys facilitated, and potential disputes arising
out of investigations independently undertaken by the board and a district
attorney's office shall be avoided and resolved. Any investigation undertaken
by the board pursuant to paragraphs three or four of subdivision a of section
four hundred and fifty-one shall be conducted in accordance with the
provisions of the applicable protocol, if any, entered into pursuant to this
subdivision. Provided, however, that the lack of a protocol pursuant to this
subdivision shall not prohibit the board from undertaking any investigation
authorized by this chapter.



   c.   Civilian Complaint Review Board. Within ninety days after the
appointment of the last member of the board pursuant to section four hundred
and fifty, the board and the civilian complaint review board established
pursuant to chapter eighteen-a of this charter shall establish a protocol
pursuant to which (i) the board, if in the course of any assessment, audit or
investigation undertaken pursuant to subdivision a of section four hundred
and fifty-one, forms a reasonable belief that any act of misconduct, as
defined in paragraph one of subdivision c of section four hundred and forty
of this charter, has occurred or is occurring, shall as soon as practicable,
report the facts that support such belief to the civilian complaint review
board; (ii) the civilian complaint review board, if in the course of an
investigation authorized pursuant to chapter eighteen-a of the charter, forms
a reasonable belief that any act of corruption has occurred or is occurring,
shall as soon as practicable, report the facts that support such belief to
the board; and (iii) information shall be exchanged and cooperation between
the boards facilitated.



Section 458. Severability.



   If any provision of this chapter, or the local law creating this
chapter, or of any amendments thereto, shall be held invalid or ineffective
in whole or in part or inapplicable to any person or situation, such holding
shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder of this chapter or local
law, and all other provisions thereof shall nevertheless be separately and
fully effective and the application of any such provision to other persons or
situations shall not be affected.



Chapter 18-C: Public Safety



Section 459. Definitions.



   a.   The term "school" means a public, private or parochial, day
care center or nursery or pre-school, elementary, intermediate, junior high,
vocational, or high school.



   b.   The term "school zone" means in or on or within any building,
structure, athletic playing field, playground or land contained within the
real property boundary line of a public, private or parochial day care center
or nursery or pre-school, elementary, intermediate, junior high, vocational,
or high school, or within one thousnd feet of the real property boundary line
comprising any such school.



   c.   The term "firearm" means a firearm, rifle, shotgun, or assault
weapon, as such terms are defined in section 10-301 of the administrative
code, or a machine gun, as defined in penal law section 265.00.



Section 460. Gun-free school safety zones.



   a.   It shall be a crime for any individual knowingly to possess a
firearm at a place that the individual knows, or has reasonable cause to
believe, is a school zone.



   b.   Subdivision a of this section shall not apply where the firearm
is:



      (i)   possessed and kept in such individual's home in a school
zone, provided that such individual is licensed or permitted to possess such
firearm; or



      (ii)   possessed and kept at such individual's business in a
school zone, provided that such individual is licensed or permitted to
possess such firearm.



   c.   Affirmative defenses to the crime established in subdivision a
shall include possession of a firearm:



      (i)   carried for personal safety between such individual's
business, home, or bank in a school zone, provided that such individual is
licensed or permitted to possess such firearm for such purpose;



      (ii)   just purchased or obtained by such individual and being
transported that same day for the first time to such individual's home or
business in a school zone where it will be stored, provided that such
individual is licensed or permitted to possess such firearm;



      (iii)   carried between a police department facility for
inspection and an individual's business, home, bank, or point of purchase in
a school zone, provided that such individual is licensed or permitted to
possess such firearm;



      (iv)   carried by licensed or permitted individuals and being
transported to or from an authorized target practice facility;



      (v)   carried between a gunsmith for demonstrably needed
repairs and an individual's business or home in a school zone, provided that
such individual is licensed or permitted to possess such firearm;



      (vi)   used in an athletic or safety program approved by a
school in a school zone, or by the police commissioner, or in accordance with
a contract entered into between a school within the school zone and the
individual or an employer of the individual, provided that such individual is
licensed or permitted to possess such firearm for such purpose; or



      (vii)   used in accordance with a contract entered into
between a business within the school zone and the individual or an employer
of the individual, provided that such individual is licensed or permitted to
possess such firearm for such purpose.



   d.   It shall be a crime for any person, knowingly or with reckless
disregard for the safety of another, to discharge a firearm in a school zone.



   e.   Affirmative defenses to the crime established in subdivision d
shall include discharge of a firearm:



      (i)   by an individual for self-defense, provided that such
individual is licensed or permitted to possess such firearm for such purpose;



      (ii)   for use in a special event or safety program authorized
by a school in a school zone or by the police commissioner;



      (iii)   by an individual in accordance with a contract entered
into between a school in the school zone and the individual or an employer of
the individual, provided that such individual is licensed or permitted to
possess such firearm for such purpose; or



      (iv)   by an individual in accordance with a contract entered
into between a business and the individual or an employer of the individual,
provided that such individual is licensed or permitted to possess such
firearm for such purpose.



   f.   Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment of not more than one year or by a
fine of not more than ten thousand dollars, or both.



   g.   In addition to the penalties prescribed in subdivision f of
this section, any person who violates this section shall be liable for a
civil penalty of not more than ten thousand dollars.



   h.   This section shall not apply to a police officer, as such term
is defined in section 1.20 of the criminal procedure law, or a federal law
enforcement officer, as such term is defined in section 2.15 of the criminal
procedure law.



   i.   The police commissioner may promulgate rules implementing the
provisions of this section. The police commissioner shall provide written
notice of the requirements of this section to all persons who receive an
official authorization to purchase a firearm and to all persons applying for
a license or permit, or renewal of a license or permit. Failure to receive
such notice shall not be a defense to any violation of this section.



   j.   The city of New York and its agencies, officers or employees
shall not be liable to any party by reason of any incident or injury
occurring in a gun-free school safety zone arising out of a violation of any
provision of this section.



Chapter 18-D: Sale, Purchase and Possession of Weapons



Section 461. Definition.



   The term "firearm" means a firearm, rifle, shotgun, or assault weapon,
as such terms are defined in section 10-301 of the administrative code, or a
machine gun, as defined in penal law section 265.00.



Section 462. Permits and licenses for the purchase and possession of firearms.



   Notwithstanding any other provision of local law, no person under the
age of twenty-one shall be granted a permit or license to purchase and
possess a firearm. If the applicant for a permit or license is a partnership
or corporation, only those members of the partnership or corporation over the
age of twenty-one may apply for a permit or license to purchase and possess a
firearm on behalf of the partnership or corporation. This section shall not
apply to any person under the age of twenty-one who has been issued a valid
permit or license to possess a firearm on the date that this section shall
become law.



Section 463. Sale or disposal of firearms.



   It shall be a crime for any person to sell, offer for sale, or dispose
of a firearm to any person under the age of twenty-one within the city of New
York, unless such person under the age of twenty-one has a valid permit or
license or is otherwise exempted by law.



Section 464. Carrying and possession of firearms.



   It shall be a crime for any person under the age of twenty-one to carry
or otherwise have in his or her possession any firearm within the limits of
the city of New York, unless such person has a valid permit or license or is
otherwise exempted by law. If a partnership or corporation carries or has in
its possession a firearm, no member, officer or employee of such partnership
or corporation under the age of twenty-one shall carry or have in his or her
possession such firearm within the limits of the city of New York.



Section 465. Exemptions.



   a.   Sections four hundred sixty-two and four hundred sixty-four
shall not apply to:



      (1)   persons in the military service of the state of New York
when duly authorized by regulations issued by the chief of staff to the
governor to carry or possess a firearm;



      (2)   persons in the military or other service of the United
States, in pursuit of official duty or when duly authorized by federal law,
regulation or order to carry or possess a firearm;



      (3)   persons employed in fulfilling defense contracts with
the government of the United States or agencies thereof when possession of a
firearm is necessary for manufacture, transport, installation and testing
under the requirements of such contract;



      (4)   police officers as defined by the criminal procedure law
section 1.20;



      (5)   peace officers as defined by the criminal procedure law
section 2.10, provided that such peace officers are (i) authorized pursuant
to law or regulation of the state or city of New York to possess a firearm
within the city of New York without a license or permit therefore; and (ii)
authorized by their employer to possess such firearm; or



      (6)   participants in special events when authorized by the
police com- missioner.



   b.   Any person listed in subdivision a of this section may be
permitted or licensed to purchase a firearm according to State law and the
rules of the city of New York. Pursuant to section four hundred sixty-three,
it shall be a crime for a dealer to sell any firearm to any person listed in
subdivision a without securing full and secure proof of identification.



Section 466. Penalties.



   a.   Any violation of the provisions of sections four hundred
sixty-three, four hundred sixty-four or subdivision b of section four hundred
sixty-five shall be a misdemeanor and punishable by not more than one year
imprisonment or by a fine of not more than ten thousand dollars or by both.



   b.   In addition to the penalties prescribed in subdivision a of
this section, any person who violates the provisions of sections four hundred
sixty-three, four hundred sixty-four or subdivision b of section four hundred
sixty-five shall be liable for a civil penalty of not more than ten thousand
dollars.



Chapter 19: Fire Department



Section 481. Department; commissioner.



   There shall be a fire department the head of which shall be the
commissioner.



Section 482. Chief may be designated as commissioner.



   The mayor may designate the chief of the fire department to serve as
commissioner, and in such case he shall exercise the powers and duties of
commissioner and shall continue to exercise his powers and duties as chief
and shall receive the salary of the commissioner. While serving as
commissioner the chief shall forfeit none of his pension rights and
privileges as chief or his civil service status, and such service and the
time during which he so serves shall be part of his time and service as
chief. Such designation as commissioner shall be in writing filed in the
office of the department and in the office of the mayor.



Section 483. Deputies.



   The commissioner may appoint three deputies, one of whom may perform
all the duties and exercise all of the powers of the commissioner except
appointment or promotion, detail or dismissal of any member of the uniformed
force when thereunto authorized by instrument in writing to be filed in the
offices of the mayor and the comptroller.



Section 484. Designation of officers to act.



   The commissioner may designate a clerk or chief of a bureau, who shall
have power, when thereunto authorized by the commissioner by instrument in
writing to be filed in the offices of the mayor and comptroller, to sign
warrants and perform such other duties incidental thereto as may be required
during the absence of the commissioner, and for a period of time to be
designated in the instrument.



Section 485. Seal.



   The commissioner may adopt a seal for the department and direct its use.



Section 486. Treasurer.



   The commissioner shall be the treasurer of the department and shall
file in the office of the comptroller a bond for the faithful performance of
his duties as such treasurer.



Section 487. Powers.



   a.   The commissioner shall have sole and exclusive power and
perform all duties for the government, discipline, management, maintenance
and direction of the fire department and the premises and property in the
custody thereof, however, the commissioner shall provide written notice with
supporting documentation at least forty-five days prior to the permanent
closing of any firehouse or the permanent removal or relocation of any fire
fighting unit to the council members, community boards and borough presidents
whose districts are served by such facility or unit and the chairperson of
the council's public safety committee. For purposes of this section, the term
"permanent" shall mean a time period in excess of six months. In the event
that the permanent closing of any firehouse or the permanent removal or
relocation of any firefighting unit does not occur within four months of the
date of the written notice, the commissioner shall issue another written
notice with supporting documentation prior to such permanent removal or
relocation. The four months during which the written notice is effective
shall be tolled for any period in which a restraining order or injunction
prohibiting the closing of such noticed facility or unit shall be in effect.



   b.   The department shall have sole and exclusive power and
authority to extinguish fires at any place within the jurisdiction of the
city and shall have power and authority to extinguish fires upon any vessel
in the port of New York or upon any dock, wharf, pier, warehouse or other
structure bordering upon or adjacent to such port.



   c.   The commissioner shall have power to cause any vessel moored to
or anchored near any dock or pier in the city to be removed to and secured at
such place in the harbor as shall be designated by the commissioner, provided
that such vessel shall be on fire or in danger of catching fire or may be, by
reason of its condition or the nature of its cargo, a fire menance to
shipping, to property or to the water front of the city.



   d.   The commissioner shall have sole and exclusive jurisdiction
over the approval of the installation of all containers for combustibles,
chemicals, explosives, inflammables or other dangerous substances, articles,
compounds or mixtures, except storage tanks and auxiliary storage tanks for
oil-burning equipment and except where the location of the container may
affect the structural condition of the building, in which case the
commissioner shall not give his approval without the approval of the
commissioner of buildings. The commissioner shall certify his approval of all
installations of containers in buildings except storage tanks and auxiliary
storage tanks for oil-burning equipment to the commissioner of buildings.



   e.   The commissioner shall have the sole and exclusive power from
time to time to designate and fix the location of all fire alarm telegraph,
signal and alarm stations in the city, and shall have access to and control
of the same for the purpose of the department.



   f.   The department shall have the power and authority to provide
general ambulance services, emergency medical services and other response
services necessary to preserve public health, safety and welfare, and to
perform any functions relating to the provision of such services. This
subdivision shall not be construed to limit or impair the powers of any other
agency established pursuant to this charter.



   g.   The department shall have the power and authority to regulate
helicopter landings and takeoffs at or from locations other than airports,
heliports or other facilities approved by the commissioner of small business
services, helicopter external load lift operations, seaplane landings and
takeoffs at or from seaplane bases approved by the commissioner of small
business services, and hot air balloon operations. This subdivision shall not
be construed to limit or impair the powers of any other agency established
pursuant to this charter, except to the extent that the aforementioned powers
granted to the department were previously exercised by the commissioner of
small business services.



Section 488. Enforcement of fire laws.



   The commissioner shall have the power and it shall be his duty to
enforce all laws and the rules and regulations of the board of standards and
appeals in respect to:



      1.   The manufacture, storage, sale, transportation or use of
combustibles, chemicals, explosives, inflammable or other dangerous
substances, articles, compounds or mixtures.



      2.   The investigation of the cause, circumstances and origin
of fires and the suppression of arson.



      3.   The prevention of fires or danger to life or property
therefrom, excluding provisions relating to structural conditions and
excluding provisions relating to the installation of oil-burning equipment
and all appurtenances thereof.    The powers conferred by this section
shall not extend to the enforcement of any provision of the health code or
the regulations of the board of health, or of any provision of the building
code relating to the construction or alteration of buildings or the
installation of service equipment, except as otherwise provided therein, or
interfere in any manner with the powers and duties of the board of health or
the chairman of the board of health or of the department of buildings or of
the commissioner of buildings.



Section 489. Regulation of combustibles, etc.



   The commissioner may make and enforce rules and regulations for the
manufacture, storage, sale, transportation or use of combustibles, chemicals,
explosives, inflammables or other dangerous substances, articles, compounds
or mixtures.



Section 490. Powers of inspection of the commissioner.



   a.   The commissioner is empowered to:



      (1)   Cause any building, structure, tunnel, enclosure,
vessel, place or premises to be inspected for fire hazards by any officer or
employee of the department designated for such purpose.



      (2)   Inspect and test any automatic or other fire alarm
system or fire extinguishing equipment.



   b.   Whenever in any investigation or inspection carried on by the
department a condition is found which in the opinion of the commissioner
should be referred to any other department, he shall promptly make such
reference in writing.



Section 491. Orders of the commissioner; enforcement.



   a.   The commissioner shall have the power and it shall be his duty:



      (1)   To order in writing the remedying of any condition in
violation of any rule or regulation or any provision of law which he is
empowered to enforce.



      (2)   To cause any order of the commissioner which is not
complied with within the time fixed in the order for such compliance to be
enforced and to take proceedings for the enforcement thereof as may be
provided by law.



   b.   Every order, requirement, decision or determination of the
commissioner shall be in writing. The commissioner shall not vary from or
take any proceeding or issue any order contrary to the Labor Law, the
Multiple Dwelling Law, the building code or any other provision of law or any
rule or decision of the board of standards and appeals.



Section 492. Right of entry of officers of the department.



   The commissioner and his deputies and such other officers or employees
of the department as are authorized by the commissioner may without fee or
hindrance enter and inspect all vessels, premises, grounds, structures,
buildings and every part thereof and all underground passages of every sort
in the city or in the port of New York for compliance with the provisions of
law or rules and regulations enforced by the department. Any refusal to
permit such entry or inspection shall be triable by a judge of the New York
city criminal court and punishable by not more than thirty days'
imprisonment, or by a fine of not more than fifty dollars, or both.



Section 493. Member of department; no other office.



Editor's note: Became Section 1130.



Section 494. Duties of chief; restriction.



   Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of any general, special or
local law, or rule or regulation, a chief of the fire department shall not
serve in any other capacity to the department during his term of office of
chief. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be deemed to
have vacated the office of chief so held.



Chapter 19-A: Emergency Management Department



Section 495. Department; commissioner.



   There shall be an emergency management department, which may also be
known as the New York city office of emergency management, the head of which
shall be the commissioner of emergency management. The commissioner shall be
appointed by the mayor. The commissioner shall also serve as the local
director of civil defense, with the powers of a local director of civil
defense.



Section 496. Deputies.



   The commissioner shall have the power to appoint and, at pleasure,
remove deputies, one to be known as first deputy commissioner. During the
absence or disability of the commissioner, the first deputy commissioner, or
if the first deputy commissioner shall be absent or under disability, the
deputy commissioner designated by the commissioner, shall possess all the
powers and perform all the duties of the commissioner, except the power of
making appointments and transfers.



Section 497. Powers and duties of the commissioner.



   The commissioner shall have cognizance and control of the government,
administration, disposition and discipline of the department. The
commissioner shall have the powers and duties to:



      a.   coordinate the city's response to all emergency
conditions and potential incidents which require a multi-agency response,
including but not limited to severe weather, threats from natural hazards and
natural disasters, power and other public service outages, labor unrest other
than the keeping of the peace, water main breaks, transportation and transit
incidents, hazardous substance discharges, building collapses, aviation
disasters, explosions, acts of terrorism and such other emergency conditions
and incidents which affect public health and safety;



      b.   monitor on a constant basis all potential emergency
conditions and potential incidents which may require a multi-agency response;



      c.   coordinate and implement training programs for public
safety and health, including emergency response drills, to prepare for
emergency conditions and potential incidents which may require a multi-agency
response;



      d.   prepare plans for responding to emergency conditions and
potential incidents, including but not limited to plans for the
implementation of such emergency orders as may be approved by the mayor to
protect public safety and facilitate the rapid response and mobilization of
agencies and resources;



      e.   make recommendations to the mayor concerning the city's
emergency response capabilities and concerning the city's capacity to address
potential emergency conditions and potential incidents;



      f.   increase public awareness as to the appropriate responses
by members of the public to emergency conditions and potential incidents, and
review the city's systems for disseminating information to the public;



      g.   operate an emergency operations center to assist the city
in managing emergency conditions and potential incidents that may require a
multi-agency response;



      h.   hold regular and frequent meetings of designated
emergency response personnel of all city agencies that are determined by the
commissioner to have a direct or support role in the city's management of
emergency conditions and potential incidents which may require a multi-agency
response;



      i.   acquire federal and other funding for emergency
management, including but not limited to disaster relief, and civil defense,
and assist other agencies in obtaining such funding;



      j.   coordinate with all city agencies to ensure that all such
agencies develop and implement emergency response plans in connection with
planning major city events;



      k.   coordinate with state, federal and other governmental
bodies to effectuate the purposes of the department;



      l.   coordinate the operation of the local emergency planning
committee established pursuant to Title III of the federal Superfund
Amendments and Reauthorization Act;



      m.   coordinate New York city's civil defense effort in
accordance with the provisions of the Defense Emergency Act of New York state
and the city's civil defense emergency operations plan, as such plan may be
amended from time to time;



      n.   perform all other functions previously performed by the
former office of emergency management and the emergency control board; and



      o.   promulgate such rules and regulations as may be necessary
to implement the provisions of this chapter.



Section 498. Agency cooperation.



   The department shall be the lead agency in the coordination and
facilitation of resources in incidents involving public safety and health,
including incidents which may involve acts of terrorism. All agencies shall
provide the department promptly with all information relevant to the
performance of the emergency management functions and shall collect and make
available any information requested by the department for use in emergency
planning. All agencies further shall promptly provide the department with all
appropriate material, equipment and resources needed for emergency management
functions, including personnel.



Chapter 20: Education



Section 520. Salaries of members of the board of education.



   1.   Members of the board of education, other than the president,
shall be compensated at the rate of one hundred sixty dollars and the
president of the board at the rate of one hundred seventy-five dollars per
calendar day when performing the work of the board, provided, however, that
in any fiscal year a member or president shall not be compensated for more
than two hundred ten calendar days for all work performed by such member or
president during the fiscal year.



   2.   Members of the board of education shall, within the funds
provided therefor in the budget of the board of education, be entitled to use
an automobile limited to the performance of their public duties provided,
that the cost of such automobile shall not exceed that of automobiles
provided to city commissioners.



Section 521. Property under board of education; care and control; suits in
regard thereto.



   a.   The title to all property, real and personal, heretofore or
hereafter acquired for school or educational purposes, and also the title to
all property, real and personal, purchased for school or educational purposes
with any school moneys, whether derived from the issue of bonds or raised by
taxation, shall be vested in the city, but under the care and control of the
board of education for the purposes of public education, recreation and other
public uses.



   b.   Suits in relation to such property shall be brought in the name
of the board of education.



   c.   The city shall have power to take and hold any property, real
or personal, devised or bequeathed or transferred to it for the purposes of
education in said city; but such property shall be under the care and control
of the board of education for the purposes of public education, recreation
and other public uses in the city.



   d.   Not later than the twenty sixth day of April, the board of
education shall submit to the mayor, the borough presidents and the council
an itemized statement, covering those portions of the city's capital plant,
as defined in section eleven hundred ten-a, which have been committed to the
care and control of the board of education or officers or employees thereof,
by project type and, within project type, by personal services and
other-than-personal services, of the amounts appropriated for maintenance of
such portions of the capital plant in the previous and current fiscal years
as originally adopted and as modified through the first nine months of the
current fiscal year, and of the amounts actually expended for such
maintenance in the previous fiscal year and through the first nine months of
the current fiscal year and the amounts estimated to be expended for such
purpose during the balance of the current fiscal year; and, an explanation of
the substantive differences, if any, between the amounts actually expended
for such maintenance in the previous fiscal year or projected to be expended
for such purpose in the current fiscal year and the amounts originally
appropriated for such purpose for such years.



   e.   Not later than the first day of February of the year two
thousand and three and on a quarterly basis thereafter, not later than May
first, August first, November first, and February first of each year, the
chancellor of the city school district shall submit to the council an
itemized statement covering the status of every school capital project that
was completed during the immediately preceding fiscal quarter or not
completed but for which funding was appropriated. This statement shall
include, but not be limited to, the following information for each such
project: (1) the total amount appropriated for the school capital project;
(2) the original and current total estimated cost of the school capital
project, disaggregated by project phase, including, but not limited to,
scope, design, and construction; (3) the projected or actual start and end
date of each such project phase; (4) the total amount expended on the project
as of the last day of the immediately preceding fiscal quarter, disaggregated
by project phase; (5) a clear explanation of the reasons for any projected or
actual cost overrun of ten percent or more of the total estimated cost of the
project; (6) a clear explanation of the reasons for any delay of sixty days
or longer with respect to any phase of the project and (7) the name, office
phone number and e-mail address of the project manager, or person responsible
for reporting on the project, within three months of appropriation for the
school capital project.



   f.   The chancellor of the city school district shall provide
additional electronic notification to the council within thirty days of
learning of any of the following with respect to any school capital project:
(1) any projected or actual delay of sixty days or more with respect to any
phase of the project and (2) any projected or actual change of ten percent or
more of the total estimated cost of the project. The chancellor of the city
school district shall also provide the information required by this
subdivision to the council member who represents the district in which the
project is located.



   g.   The office of management and budget shall provide electronic
notification to the council immediately upon issuing a certificate to proceed
for every school capital project The office of management and budget shall
also provide the information required in this subdivision to the council
member who represents the district in which the project is located.



   h.   For purposes of subdivisions e, f, and g, "school capital
project" shall mean: (1) any project included in any current or prior
five-year educational facilities capital plan; and (2) any capital project
for a school facility for which funding was appropriated to the department of
education or its successor pursuant to sections two hundred eleven, two
hundred forty-nine, or two hundred fifty-four.



Section 522. Reports of department.



   a.   The department of education shall on or before the thirtieth
day of November in each year make and transmit to the mayor a report in
writing, for the year ending on the thirty-first day of July next preceding,
stating the whole number of schools under its jurisdiction during the said
year; the number of teachers; the total number of pupils on register, and the
average attendance at each school; the number of high schools and training
schools for teachers, with the number of teachers and the attendance of
pupils at each; the corporate schools or societies from which reports have
been made to the department of education, the length of time such schools
have been kept open, and the number of teachers and of pupils taught in each
such school and the total amount of money expended for the purposes of public
education in the city during the preceding fiscal year. The department of
education shall also make in said reports such suggestions and
recommendations relative to the public schools of the city as it may deem
proper.



   b.   Temporary and non-standard classroom reporting. The department
of education shall report to the council annually, on or before October
fifteenth of each year, the number of non-standard classrooms within the
public school system. Such report shall provide the number of non-standard
classrooms, disaggregated by: school; zip code; school district;
instructional region; community district; council district; and borough, and
for each non-standard classroom, the number of children who attend classes in
each such non-standard classroom. For purposes of this section, the term
"non-standard classrooms" shall mean any of the following spaces that are
used for subject-matter instruction where students are intended to be seated
at desks: a transportable classroom unit; a classroom located in a structure
that was not built or renovated with the intention that such structure be a
permanent educational facility; a classroom located in a multi-purpose room,
also called a cluster room, and not used for the specialized instructional,
administrative or other purposes for which such room was designed or
intended; a classroom located in a space that was not designed for classroom
use when built or when last fully renovated; and a classroom the use of which
violates any New York city or state law pertaining to classroom design,
location or amenity or the type of interior space that may lawfully be used
as classroom space.



   c.   Class size reporting. The department of education shall submit
a report to the city council twice annually, on or before November fifteenth
and February fifteenth of each year, with respect to the following
information regarding class sizes in New York city public schools:



      1.   For each school and, separately, for each academic
program within a school or school building, including smaller schools housed
within larger institutions and specialized programs, such as those for gifted
students and for students with special needs, the average class size per
grade of all classes in such school or program;



      2.   For each school district and for each region, the average
class size per grade of all classes in such district and region;



      3.   For each borough, the average class size per grade of all
classes in such borough;



      4.   Citywide, the average class size per grade; and



      5.   A detailed description of the methodologies used to
calculate all such grade size data reported.



   d.   Presentation of class size reporting. Average class size shall
be reported:



      1.   By the number of students, rounded to the nearest tenth;
and



      2.   By core academic subject, in all grades in which such
core academic subjects are taught in classes that vary from such grades'
homeroom classes.



   e.   Class size reporting exceptions. The reporting required by
subdivision c of this section shall:



      1.   Exclude classes that are composed of students who are
enrolled in any school or program that exclusively serves students who are
incarcerated, on probation, or otherwise under the jurisdiction of the state
or federal court system;



      2.   Be made by category of class, such as 12-to-1 or 5-to-1
student/teacher ratio, with respect to students who attend classes
exclusively for children who have individualized education plans; and



      3.   Exclude classes taught at vocational schools and
programs, also known as career and technical schools and programs, to the
extent that such classes within such schools and programs do not provide core
academic content.



   f.   Dissemination of information. The reporting required by
subdivision c of this section shall, in addition to being provided to the
city council, be placed on the department's website, and may be distributed
by such other means as the chancellor, in his or her discretion, determines
to be a reasonable method of providing such information to the public. The
reporting required by subdivision g of this section shall be provided to the
city council in electronic form and be placed on the department's website in
an electronic form compatible with a non-proprietary database program.
Further, a link to the reporting required by subdivision g of this section
shall be posted on each school's web portal, and such reporting may be
distributed by such other means as the chancellor, in his or her discretion,
determines to be a reasonable method of providing such information to the
public.



   g.   Capacity and utilization reporting. Not later than the first
day of November of the year two thousand thirteen and not later than the
first day of November of every year thereafter, the chancellor of the city
school district shall submit to the council a report on capacity and
utilization data for the prior school year. For the purposes of this
subdivision, the following terms shall have the following meanings:



      "Academic intervention services" shall mean any academic or
behavioral services provided to students in addition to regular classroom
instruction including, but not limited to, services for special education
students and students identified as english language learners;



      "Health clinic" shall mean any area within a school designated
exclusively for providing health services to students including, but not
limited to, physical examinations and screenings for vision, hearing and
other medical conditions;



      "Non-school organization" shall mean any organization or program
that is not operated by the New York city department of education including,
but not limited to, after school programs, general education development
programs and social services;



      "Physical fitness space" shall mean any space used for the
purpose of physical fitness instruction;



      "School" shall mean any elementary, middle or high school within
the jurisdiction of the New York city department of education and in any
educational facility owned or leased by the city of New York, holding some
combination thereof including, but not limited to, district 75 schools and
charter schools; and



      "Teachers' lounge" shall mean any space exclusively designated
for use by teachers and school staff for non-instructional time.



   Such report shall include the total number of each type of room or
space listed below, indicate whether such type of room or space is shared by
multiple schools, and provide the following information for each school
building and each school within a building or structure that holds one or
more schools, and shall identify space utilized for a specified purpose if
such space is primarily utilized for such identified purpose no less than
fifty percent of the time, provided that nothing herein shall prevent the
reporting of additional spaces that are utilized for less than fifty percent
of the time if such percentage of time is indicated in the report, provided
that all information required by this subdivision shall be aggregated
citywide, as well as disaggregated by community school district, council
district and borough:



      1.   Cluster rooms or specialty rooms used for the purpose of
delivering specialized instruction and the purposes for which such rooms are
utilized in such subject areas including, but not limited to, art, music,
dance, science, computer, theatre and shop, by type of usage, and the square
footage of each such room;



      2.   Rooms utilized for occupational or physical therapy,
speech, hearing, vision, adaptive physical education, counseling,
school-based support teams and testing accommodations for students with
disabilities, by type of usage, and the square footage of each such room;



      3.   Rooms utilized for academic intervention services, and
the square footage of each such room;



      4.   Rooms utilized as physical fitness space including, but
not limited to, gymnasiums and other physical fitness space, including the
square footage of each such room;



      5.   Non-instructional spaces, such as hallways, used for
instructional purposes, academic intervention services, or therapeutic or
counseling services;



      6.   Health clinics, and the square footage of each such
health clinic;



      7.   Student locker rooms;



      8.   Student bathrooms;



      9.   Teachers' lounges;



      10.   Auditoriums, and the square footage of each such
auditorium;



      11.   Libraries, and the square footage of each such library;



      12.   Lunchrooms, the square footage of each such lunchroom,
and the number of periods or half periods in which the lunchroom is utilized
for the purpose of serving meals each day by each school;



      13.   Rooms or spaces occupied by non-school organizations,
and the square footage being occupied by each such organization.



Section 523. Removal by mayor after hearing.



   Any member of the board of education or of the local school board may
be removed by the mayor on proof of official misconduct in office or of
negligence in official duties or of conduct in any manner connected with
official duties, or otherwise, which tends to discredit the office of such
member or the school system, or for mental or physical inability to perform
duties; but before removal such member shall receive notice in writing of the
charges and copy thereof, and shall be entitled to a hearing on notice before
the mayor and to the assistance of counsel at said hearing.



Section 524. School officers not to be interested in contracts; removal.



Editor's note: Became Section 1131.



Section 525. Contributions to political funds, etc., prohibited.



Editor's note: Became Section 1132.



Section 526. Powers of investigation.



   The board of education may investigate, of its own motion or otherwise
either in the board or by a committee of its own body, any subject of which
it has cognizance or over which it has legal control, including the conduct
of any of its members or employees or those of any local school board; and
for the purpose of such investigation, such board or its president, or
committee or its chairman, shall have and may exercise all the powers which a
board of education has or may exercise in the case of a trial under the
Education Law or the Civil Practice Law and Rules. Any action or
determination of a committee appointed under the provisions of this section
shall be subject to approval or reversal by the board, which may also modify
the determination of the committee in such way as the board shall deem proper
and just, and the judgment of the board thereon shall be final.



Section 526-a. Powers of investigation.



   a.   Statement of purpose and intent. The purpose and intent of this
section is to ensure that all suspected crimes committed by an adult against
a student or another adult, and all allegations of sex-offenses or other
violent crimes committed by a student against another student, including any
bias-related violent crime committed by any adult or student, in a public
school, is reported to the police department and the special commissioner of
investigation for the New York city school district. It is not the purpose
and intent of this section to mandate the reporting of incidents amounting to
ordinary misbehavior and "name calling" among students.



   b.   Where, the board, a committee of the board or officer or
employee of the city school district of the city of New York has evidence or
other information relating to a suspected crime, the board, committee,
officer or employee which has such information shall immediately report such
evidence or other information to the police department and the special
commissioner of investigation, in a form and manner prescribed by rule by the
police department, and to the school's principal, provided, however, that if
such evidence or other information directly or indirectly involves or
implicates such school principal, the report shall be made to the district
superintendent as well as the police department.



   c.   Where there is a suspected crime against a child, the school
principal or district superintendent shall promptly notify the parent or
legal guardian of such child about whom a report has been made, except where,
after consultation with the police department and the special commissioner of
investigation, it is determined that such notification would impede a
criminal investigation.



   d.   Any such committee or individual who in good faith reports
evidence or other information relating to a suspected crime to the police
department and school principal or district superintendent in accordance with
the provisions of subdivision b of this section shall have immunity from any
civil liability that may arise from the making of such report, and the school
district or any school district employee shall not take, request or cause a
retaliatory action against any such committee or individual who makes a
report. Nothing herein shall abrogate obligations of confidentiality imposed
by certain privileged relationships pursuant to state law.



   e.   The police department shall promulgate all rules necessary to
implement the provisions of this section.



   f.   The provisions of this section shall not be construed as either
(1) limiting the authority of any agency, commission, other entity or its
members to conduct any administrative, civil or criminal investigation that
is within the scope of their authority, or (2) limiting any obligation to
file a report with any city, state or federal agency concerning a suspected
crime or other activity.



Section 527. Changes in state law.



   This chapter shall not prevent the city from exercising any power now
or hereafter conferred by law.



Section 528. The installation and operation of security cameras and other
security measures in New York city public schools.



   a.   Installation of security cameras and door alarms. The
department of education, in consultation with the police department, shall
install security cameras and door alarms at schools and consolidated school
locations operated by the department of education where the chancellor, in
consultation with the police department, deems such cameras and door alarms
appropriate for safety purposes. Such cameras may be placed at the entrance
and exit doors of each school and may be placed in any area of the school
where individuals do not have a reasonable expectation of privacy. The
number, type, placement, and location of such cameras within each school
shall be at the discretion of the department of education, in consultation
with the principal of each school and the police department. Door alarms may
be placed at the discretion of the department of education, in consultation
with the police department, at the exterior doors of school buildings under
the jurisdiction of the department of education, including buildings serving
grades pre-kindergarten through five or a district 75 program. Such alarms
should provide an audible alert indicating an unauthorized departure from the
school building. For the purposes of this section, "district 75 program"
shall mean a department of education program that provides educational,
vocational, and behavioral support programs for students with severe
disabilities from pre-kindergarten through age twenty-one.



   b.   Schedule of installation for cameras. The department of
education, in consultation with the police department, shall set the
priorities for installation of cameras as set forth in subdivision a to
include among other appropriate factors consideration of the level of
violence in schools, as determined by the police department and the
department of education. By the end of two thousand six, the potential
installation of cameras shall have been reviewed for all schools under the
jurisdiction of the department of education, including elementary schools. At
the end of two thousand six, the department of education shall submit a
report to the city council indicating, for each school under its
jurisdiction, the findings of the review and the reasons for the findings
contained therein.



   c.   Schedule of installation for door alarms. The department of
education, in consultation with the police department, shall evaluate and set
priorities for the installation of door alarms, as set forth in subdivision
a. By May thirtieth, two thousand fifteen, the department of education shall
complete such evaluation for all schools under its jurisdiction, including
buildings serving grades pre-kindergarten through five or a district 75
program. By such date, the department of education shall submit a report to
the speaker of the council that describes the results of the evaluation
conducted pursuant to this subdivision, including, but not limited to, a list
of the school buildings where the installation of door alarms has been deemed
to be an appropriate safety measure and a timeline for such installation.



   d.   Training. Not later than May thirtieth, two thousand fifteen,
and annually thereafter, the department of education shall submit to the
speaker of the council a report regarding training on student safety
protocols for department of education personnel. Such report shall include,
but need not be limited to: (1) general details on the type and scope of the
training administered, (2) the intended audience for each training, and (3)
whether such training was mandatory for certain personnel.



Section 529. Education department and police department school incident
reporting requirements.



   a.   The New York city department of education, or its successor,
shall make available to the public, pursuant to subdivision d of this
section, reports that reflect the environment of criminal and seriously
disruptive behavior in schools operated by the department of education.



   b.   Such reports shall include an annual reporting, on a city-wide
basis as well as for each school or co-located group of schools operated by
the department of education, of information reported by the New York city
police department to the department of education on the following: the total
amount of major felony crime, disaggregated by felony category; the total
amount of other crime, disaggregated by crimes against persons and crimes
against property; and the total amount of non-criminal incidents.



   c.   Such reports shall also include an annual reporting, on a
city-wide basis as well as for each school or co-located group of schools
operated by the department of education, of incidents designated by the
chancellor in the citywide standards of discipline and intervention measures
(the "discipline code") as seriously disruptive, dangerous or violent
behavior in schools operated by the department of education, as reported in
the department of education's online occurrence reporting system, or a
successor reporting system. The chancellor, in consultation with the police
department, shall develop guidelines to avoid duplicative reporting pursuant
to this subdivision of information already contained in reports described in
subdivision b of this section.



   d.   The department of education shall make such reports available
on its web site and shall include such information in the school report card
for each school that it operates. The department shall also make such reports
available in paper form at all schools and all district and regional offices,
and shall provide copies to the public on request. Such annual reports shall
be available by October 1st, and shall include data from the previous school
year (September 1st through June 30th) of information reported by the New
York city police department to the department of education and, as soon as
practicable, but no later than one year after the effective date of this law,
shall also include the reports generated by the department of education
described in subdivision c of this section.



Section 530*. Reporting requirements.



   a.   The New York city department of education, or its successor,
shall report annually to the metropolitan transportation authority, on or
before the fifteenth day of August of each year, the following information:



      1.   The name and address of any school under the jurisdiction
of the department of education that is to begin its first year of operation
in the upcoming school year, the number of students enrolled in any such
school, and the zip codes of the students and the percentage of such students
in each such zip code attending each respective school;



      2.   The name and address of any school receiving an increase
of 200 or more students enrolled for the upcoming school year, the zip codes
of the new students enrolled in any such school, and the percentage of such
new students in each such zip code.



* Editor's note: there are two sections numbered as Section 530.



Section 530*. Reporting of information concerning out-of-state facility
placement.



   a.   Definitions. For the purposes of this section:



      (1)   "Child" or "children" shall mean any city resident or
residents under twenty-two years of age.



      (2)   "Department" shall mean the New York city department of
education.



      (3)   "Individual" shall mean any resident under twenty-two
years of age.



      (4)   "Out-of-state facility" shall mean any facility outside
of New York state in which the department, pursuant to section 4407 of the
New York state education law, places a child for the purposes of providing
instruction to such child.



   b.   The department shall report to the city council twice annually,
on or before the first day of September and February, respectively,
information concerning children placed in out-of-state facilities, including
but not limited to:



      (1)   The name and location of each such out-of-state facility
at which the department places children and the number of children placed by
the department at each such out-of-state facility.



      (2)   The general population served by each such out-of-state
facility, including but not limited to, the number of individuals served, and
the age, race, gender and nature of any disabilities of such individuals, to
the extent such information is available to the department.



      (3)   The types of services and therapies provided by each
such out-of-state facility.



      (4)   The total amount spent annually by the department to
provide services to children at out-of-state facilities, the total amount
spent by the department to provide services to children at each such
out-of-state facility and the average cost per child to provide services at
each such out-of-state facility.



      (5)    The number of children who are discharged from each
such out-of-state facility annually, and, if applicable, information
concerning the type of facilities in which such children are subsequently
placed.



      (6)   For each out-of-state facility listed pursuant to
paragraph (1) of this subdivision, information known by the department
concerning whether (i) any enforcement action has been taken with respect to
the license, certificate, charter or other authorization held by such
facility, (ii) the department has informed the New York state department of
education of any such enforcement action and (iii) the facility has taken or
is taking any action with respect to such enforcement action.



      (7)   For each out-of-state facility listed pursuant to
paragraph (1) of this subdivision, the final outcome of any investigation
known by the department of abuse or neglect regarding any child placed by the
department in such facility to the extent that such information may be made
public consistent with applicable laws, including the law of the jurisdiction
where such investigation was conducted.



      (8)    The department shall promptly notify in writing the
parents or guardians of any child who is placed in an out-of-state facility
of any information with respect to such out-of-state-facility that is
reported pursuant to paragraphs (6) and (7) of this subdivision.



   c.   No information that is otherwise required to be reported
pursuant to this section shall be reported in a manner that would violate any
applicable provision of federal, state or local law relating to the privacy
of student information or that would interfere with law enforcement
investigations or otherwise conflict with the interests of law enforcement.



   d.   The biannual reports required pursuant to this section shall be
made available on the department's website and to any member of the public
upon request.



* Editor's note: there are two sections numbered as Section 530.



Section 530-b. Student discharge reporting data.



   a.   For the purposes of this section:



      1.   "Cohort" shall mean a group of students who entered into
a specified grade in the same year.



      2.   "Department" shall mean the department of education of
the city of New York.



      3.   "Discharge code" shall refer to any code utilized by the
department to indicate when a student leaves a school within the department
without transferring to another school within the department or without
graduating.



      4.   "Discharged" shall mean any student whose enrollment at a
school organization has been voluntarily or involuntarily terminated or
withdrawn for reasons including, but not limited to, discharge to a private
or parochial school or a non-DOE institution, or the absence of any student
after twenty consecutive days.



      5.   "Graduation" shall mean the act of meeting all
requirements outlined by the state education law in order to receive a high
school diploma.



      6.   "Student" shall mean any pupil under the age of 21.



      7.   "Transfer code" shall mean to any code utilized by the
department to indicate when a student transfers from one school within the
department to another school within the department.



      8.   "Transferred" shall mean any student who has been
voluntarily or involuntarily reassigned to another school or program
including, but not limited to, a part-time or full-time department GED
program, or a temporary reassignment to another school program.



   b.   Not later than June 30th of the year two thousand and twelve
and on an annual basis thereafter, the chancellor of the city school district
of the city of New York shall submit to the council and post on the
department's website, a report which identifies the number of students
discharged or transferred during the previous school year from each school
under the jurisdiction of such district including any and all discharge and
transfer codes utilized by the district and disaggregated by cohort for
grades nine through twelve and by grade for students in grade six through
eight. Such report shall include, but not be limited to, the following
information:



      1.   The total number of students discharged from each school
in grades nine through twelve, disaggregated by cohort, age as of December
31st of the previous calendar year, race/ethnicity, gender, English language
learner status and special education status.



      2.   The total number of students discharged from each school
in grades six through eight, disaggregated by grade, race/ethnicity, gender,
English language learner status and special education status.



      3.   The total number of students in grades nine through
twelve who left their respective school, disaggregated by all discharge,
transfer and graduation codes used by the department.



      4.   The total number of students in grades six through eight
who left their respective school, disaggregated by all discharge, transfer
and graduation codes used by the department.



      5.   The total number of students in grades nine through
twelve, discharged due to reasons relating to pregnancy or parenting.



      6.   The total number of students in grades six through eight,
disaggregated by grade, discharged to parochial schools or private schools.



      7.   The total number of students in grades nine through
twelve, disaggregated by cohort, discharged to parochial schools or private
schools.



      8.   The total number of students in grades six through eight,
disaggregated by grade, enrolled in school at correctional facilities or
detention programs.



      9.   The total number of students in grades nine through
twelve, disaggregated by cohort, enrolled in school at correctional
facilities or detention programs.



      10.   The total number of students discharged in grades six
through eight, disaggregated by grade, receiving special education services.



      11.   The total number of students discharged in grades nine
through twelve, disaggregated by cohort, receiving special education services.



      12.   All information required by this section shall be
aggregated citywide, as well as disaggregated by borough and community school
district.



   c.   No information that is otherwise required to be reported
pursuant to this section shall be reported in a manner that would violate any
applicable provision of federal, state or local law relating to the privacy
of student information or that would interfere with law enforcement
investigations or otherwise conflict with the interests of law enforcement.
If a category contains between 0 and 9 students, or allows another category
to be narrowed to between 0 and 9 students, the number shall be replaced with
a symbol.



Section 530-c. Student graduation reporting data.



   a.   For the purposes of this section:



      1.   "Alternative education program" shall mean any program
that is specifically designed to meet the academic needs of traditionally
underperforming students.



      2.   "Department" shall mean the department of education of
the city of New York.



      3.   "Self-contained" shall mean any special education program
wherein special education students are not integrated with general education
students during academic instruction.



   b.   Not later than February 1st of the year two thousand and twelve
and on an annual basis thereafter, the chancellor of the city school district
of the city of New York shall submit to the council and post on the
department's website, a report which identifies schools under the
jurisdiction of such district that have been closed during the previous
school year and the number of students at each such school who did not
complete their respective graduation requirements prior to the closure of
such school. Such report shall include, but not be limited to, the following
information with respect to such students who did not complete graduation
requirements in the prior school year:



      1.   The total number and percentage of students at each such
school assigned to a different school and the school to which each such
student was assigned, including, but not limited to, alternative education
programs, young adult borough center programs and general education
development programs.



      2.   The total number and percentage of students who were
absent from school 0 to 20, 21-40, 41-60, 61-80, and 81-100 percent of the
time in the prior school year.



      3.   The total number and percentage of students who utilized
a credit recovery option in order to accumulate credits.



      4.   The total number and percentage of students receiving
special education services including, but not limited to, students assigned
to self-contained programs.



      5.   The total number and percentage of students who were
assigned a dropout code by the department including, but not limited to,
students who were identified by the department as having an unknown address,
exceeding 21 years of age, entering military service or voluntarily
withdrawing.



      6.   For students in grades nine through twelve, the total
number and percentage of students at each school whose grade point average
was recorded below 2.0; between 2.0 and 3.0; and between 3.0 and 4.0.



      7.   All information required by this subdivision shall be
disaggregated by grade, age as of December 31st of the previous calendar
year, race/ethnicity, gender, English language learner status, and special
education status.



      8.   All information required by this subdivision shall be
aggregated citywide, as well as disaggregated by borough and community school
district.



   c.   No information that is otherwise required to be reported
pursuant to this section shall be reported in a manner that would violate any
applicable provision of federal, state or local law relating to the privacy
of student information or that would interfere with law enforcement
investigations or otherwise conflict with the interests of law enforcement.
If a category contains between 0 and 9 students, or allows another category
to be narrowed to between 0 and 9 students, the number shall be replaced with
a symbol.



Section 530-d. Notification requirements, PCBs.



   a.   For the purposes of this section, the following terms shall
have the following meanings:



      1.   "Department" shall mean the New York city department of
education.



      2.   "PCBs" shall mean polychlorinated biphenyls.



      3.   "PCB light ballast" shall mean a device that electrically
controls fluorescent light fixtures and that includes a PCB small capacitor
containing dielectric.



      4.   "PCB lighting removal plan" shall mean the department's
comprehensive plan to remove, replace or remediate light fixtures that have
used or are using PCB light ballasts or are presumed to have used or to be
using PCB light ballasts.



      5.   "Reportable PCB levels" shall mean written test results
of light fixtures including, but not limited to, air, wipe or bulk sample
analysis, performed by or at the request of the department, the New York city
school construction authority or the United States environmental protection
agency that show concentrations of PCBs which exceed the amount allowable
pursuant to the applicable regulations promulgated by the United States
environmental protection agency, and shall also mean the inspection results
of light fixtures that are leaking and presumed to have used or to be using
PCB light ballasts.



      6.   "Public school" shall mean any school in a building owned
or leased by the department, including charter schools, that contains any
combination of grades from kindergarten through grade twelve.



   b.   The department shall notify the parents of students and the
employees in any public school that has been inspected or tested for
reportable PCB levels of the results of such inspection or testing, and
whether the results of such inspection or testing were negative or positive,
within seven days of receiving such results; provided that if such results
are received during a scheduled school vacation period exceeding five days
and the area where such inspection or testing occurred is not being used by
students during such period, such notification shall occur no later than
seven days following the end of such period. The department shall also post
such results on the department's website within seven days of receiving such
results.



   c.   The notification required pursuant to subdivision b of this
section shall include information setting forth the steps the department has
taken and will take to address such reportable PCB levels, including the
timeframe during which such reportable PCB levels were or will be addressed.
If such steps are not completed within such timeframe then the department
shall notify such parents and employees of the new timeframe for such steps.
The department shall also notify such parents and employees within seven days
of the date such steps to address reportable PCB levels are completed.



   d.   Not later than the fifteenth day of April of the year 2012 and
annually thereafter not later than the fifteenth day of November, the
department shall notify the parents of students and the employees in any
public school identified as part of the department's PCB lighting removal
plan that such school has been identified as part of such plan and shall
provide in such annual notice an explanation regarding the department's PCB
lighting removal plan including, but not limited to, the reasons for removal,
replacement, or remediation, the fact that certain light fixtures are
presumed to contain PCBs, and the schedule for such removal, replacement or
remediation.



Section 530-e. PCB reporting data.



   a.   For the purposes of this section, the following terms shall
have the following meanings:



      1.   "Department" shall mean the New York city department of
education.



      2.   "PCBs" shall mean polychlorinated biphenyls.



      3.   "PCB light ballast" shall mean a device that electrically
controls fluorescent light fixtures and that includes a PCB small capacitor
containing dielectric.



      4.   "PCB lighting removal plan" shall mean the department's
comprehensive plan to remove, replace or remediate light fixtures that have
used or are using PCB light ballasts or are presumed to have used or to be
using PCB light ballasts.



      5.   "Reportable PCB levels" shall mean written test results
of light fixtures including, but not limited to, air, wipe or bulk sample
analysis, performed by or at the request of the department, the New York city
school construction authority or the United States environmental protection
agency that show concentrations of PCBs which exceed the amount allowable
pursuant to the applicable regulations promulgated by the United States
environmental protection agency, and shall also mean the inspection results
of light fixtures that are leaking and presumed to have used or to be using
PCB light ballasts.



      6.   "Public school" shall mean any school in a building owned
or leased by the department, including charter schools, that contains any
combination of grades from kindergarten through grade twelve.



   b.   Not later than the fifteenth day of April of the year 2012 the
department shall submit to the council a preliminary report, and annually
thereafter not later than the fifteenth day of November the department shall
submit to the council a report, regarding the progress of the department's
PCB lighting removal plan and the department's efforts to address caulk in
public schools and shall post such report on the department's website. The
report shall include, but not be limited to: information regarding the
overall progress on such plan including, but not limited to, an updated list
of public schools identified as part of such plan, the steps that will be
taken to address reportable PCB levels at such schools, and the schedule for
addressing such reportable PCB levels at such schools; a list of schools
where reportable PCB levels have been addressed, the steps taken to address
such reportable PCB levels including, but not limited to, information
regarding whether light fixtures and floor tiles were removed, replaced or
remediated, and the timeframe during which such reportable PCB levels were
addressed; a list of schools for which notification was sent to parents and
employees pursuant to subdivision b of section 530-d of this chapter, the
steps taken to address the presence and removal, replacement or remediation
of PCB light ballasts at such schools, including the number of light fixtures
and floor tiles that were removed, replaced or remediated and the reasons for
which inspection or testing for reportable PCB levels occurred including, but
not limited to, routine inspection and discovery of a leaking ballast or
pursuant to a consent order or any existing agreement with the United States
environmental protection agency; a summary of the test results for any
routine testing for PCBs in caulk performed by or at the direction of the
department or the New York city school construction authority including, but
not limited to, which schools were tested and for what reason, and
information pertaining to the steps the department has taken and will take to
address the presence and removal of PCBs in caulking including, but not
limited to, the test results of any pilot study conducted pursuant to a
consent order or any existing agreement with the United States environmental
protection agency, an update on the status of such pilot study, and in the
event that the department and New York City school construction authority
reach agreement with the United States environmental protection agency at
some future date on a final citywide PCB management plan, as described in and
pursuant to all terms and conditions of the existing agreement with EPA, a
description and update on PCB management activities, including the management
of PCBs in caulking, implemented under such a final plan. All information
required by this subdivision shall be aggregated citywide, as well as
disaggregated by community school district, council district and borough.



   c.   The report shall include a link to information posted on the
website of the department of health and mental hygiene that provides answers
to frequently asked questions regarding PCBs.



   d.   The requirements of this section shall no longer be in effect
following the department's submission to the council of a report documenting
that the removal of all light fixtures pursuant to the department's PCB
lighting removal plan has been completed.



Section 530-f. Instructional arts requirements data.



   a.   For the purposes of this section:



      "Department" shall mean the department of education of the city
of New York.



      "Instructional requirements for the arts" shall mean the
regulations promulgated within part 100 of title 8, or successor regulations,
of the New York code rules and regulations by the New York state commissioner
of education.



   b.   Not later than February 15th 2014, and on an annual basis
thereafter by the 15th of February, the department shall submit to the
council and post on the department's website, data regarding the provision of
instructional requirements for the arts in schools for the preceding school
year. Such report shall include, but not be limited to:



      1.   The total number and percentage of schools serving
students in grades one through six that have met all instructional
requirements in all of the following disciplines: music, dance, theatre and
visual arts;



      2.   The total number and percentage of students in grade
eight who have:



         i.   completed all instructional requirements for the
arts grades seven through eight;



      3.   The total number and percentage of high school graduates
who have:



         i.   completed all instructional requirements for the
arts for grades nine through twelve;



      4.   The total number of full-time licensed arts instructors
on staff for grades seven through twelve including but not limited to their
areas of arts certification; and



      5.   The total number of part-time licensed arts instructors
on staff for grades seven through twelve including but not limited to their
areas of arts certification.



   c.   Data shall include demographic information regarding the racial
and ethnic composition of the school and shall include, but shall not be
limited to, the percentage of special education students and the percentage
of English language learners.



   d.   All information required to be reported by this section shall
be aggregated citywide, as well as disaggregated by city council district,
community school district and school.



   e.    No information that is otherwise required to be reported
pursuant to this section shall be reported in a manner that would violate any
applicable provision of federal, state or local law relating to the privacy
of student information or that would interfere with law enforcement
investigations or otherwise conflict with the interests of law enforcement.
If a category contains between 0 and 9 students, or allows another category
to be narrowed to between 0 and 9 students, the number shall be replaced with
a symbol.



Chapter 21: Department of Parks and Recreation



Section 531. Department; commissioner.



   There shall be a department of parks and recreation the head of which
shall be the commissioner of parks and recreation.



Section 532. Deputies.



   The commissioner may appoint three deputies.



Section 533. Powers and duties of the commissioner.



   Except with respect to the functions of the board of education and
except as otherwise provided by law, the commissioner shall have the power
and it shall be his or her duty:



      a.   Parks



         1.   to manage and care for all parks, squares and
public places, the sidewalks immediately adjoining the same and all
playgrounds, playground fixtures and other recreation properties, except
those within the jurisdiction of the board of education or other agencies,
but such jurisdiction shall not extend to or include the buildings which are
not or hereafter may be erected in parks, squares or public places for
governmental purposes other than those of the department;



         2.   to prepare plans for the establishment and
improvement of a park system for the city with due regard to proper
connections with the systems of federal, state and county parks and
recreation areas in the city and the counties adjacent to the city, and
execute the same when authorized in accordance with the provisions of this
charter;



         3.   to maintain the beauty and utility of all parks,
squares, public places, playgrounds and other recreational properties, except
those within the jurisdiction of the board of education and to institute and
execute all measures for the improvement thereof for ornamental purposes and
for the beneficial uses of the people of the city;



         4.   to plant and maintain trees and to construct, erect
and establish seats, drinking fountains, statues and works of art in any
place within his or her jurisdiction, and to determine when and where lamps
or lighting appliances shall be placed and lighted therein and the design
thereof;



         5.   to authorize and regulate the use of and the
projections on and determine the line or curb and the surface construction of
all streets and avenues lying within any park, square or public place or
within a distance of three hundred fifty feet from the outer boundaries
thereof;



         6.   to maintain buildings and structures now or
hereafter erected or established in any park, square, public place or
playground under his or her jurisdiction and to carry out and perform
existing contracts with corporations or institutions for the construction and
maintenance of such buildings and structures;



         7.   to provide the necessary instruments, furniture and
equipment for the several buildings and structures within his or her
jurisdiction and to develop and improve the same subject to the provisions of
law and existing contracts;



         8.   to have the management, direction and control of
all real or personal property granted, devised, bequeathed or conveyed to the
city for the extension, improvement or ornamentation of the parks, squares or
public places in the city or for the establishment or maintenance, within the
limits of any such park, square or public place, of playgrounds, other
recreational properties and other facilities within the department's
jurisdiction and upon such trusts and conditions as may be prescribed by the
grantors or donors thereof and accepted by the commissioner, or proposed by
the commissioner and accepted by the grantors or donor thereof;



         9.   to establish and enforce rules and regulations for
the use, government and protection of public parks and of all property under
the charge and control of the department, which rules and regulations so far
as practicable shall be uniform in all boroughs and shall have the force and
effect of law. Such rules and regulations shall apply to and be enforceable
within public parks, recreational facilities and other property under the
jurisdiction of the Hudson River park trust, the battery park city authority
and the Brooklyn bridge park corporation provided that such trust, authority
or corporation have entered into agreements with the commissioner to provide
for the maintenance, protection and/or government of such property by the
department, except to the extent that such rules and regulations are
inconsistent with specific rules and regulations of the Hudson river park
trust, the battery park city authority or the Brooklyn bridge park
corporation.



            (i)   Except as otherwise provided by
subparagraphs (ii) and (iii) of this paragraph, any violation of such rules
or regulations shall be an offense punishable by imprisonment of up to one
day or by a fine of not more than 200 dollars. Any violation of such rules or
regulations shall also subject the violator to a civil penalty of not more
than 300 dollars for each violation, provided that the default judgment for
any such violation shall not exceed 150 percent of the scheduled penalty as
set forth in section 3-116 of title 48 of the rules of the city of New York
or any successor provision, which may be recovered in a proceeding before the
office of administrative trials and hearings pursuant to section 1049-a. Such
proceeding shall be commenced by the service of a notice of violation
returnable to such office pursuant to such section.



            (ii)   Notwithstanding subparagraph (i) of this
paragraph, the civil penalty limitations in relation to open container
restrictions, littering and urination, and noise set forth in sections
10-173, 16-141 and 24-270, respectively, shall govern where applicable.



            (iii)   Notwithstanding subparagraphs (i) and (ii)
of this paragraph, the administrative code may classify violations of such
rules as misdemeanors, and may prescribe sanctions consistent with such
classification. Violations of rules that are subject to misdemeanor sanctions
in accordance with this subparagraph and the administrative code may also
subject the violator to civil penalties greater than those specified in
subparagraph (i), as may be provided in such code.



         9-a.   by agreement with the battery park city authority
(a public benefit corporation established pursuant to title twelve of article
eight of the public authorities law), to enforce the rules and regulations of
such authority or of a not-for-profit corporation acting on behalf of such
authority, relating to the use, government and protection of public parks and
recreational facilities of and adjacent to battery park city within the
jurisdiction of such authority. In addition to or as an alternative to any of
the remedies or penalties provided under any other provision of law,
violation of such rules and regulations shall be punishable by a civil
penalty of not more than five hundred dollars for each violation, which may
be recovered in a proceeding before the environmental control board. Such
proceeding shall be commenced by a notice of violation returnable before such
board. The procedures set forth in section one thousand forty-nine-a of this
charter applicable to the adjudication by the environmental control board of
violations within the jurisdiction of the commissioner shall apply to the
adjudication of violations of such rules and regulations by such board and
final orders of such board imposing civil penalties for such violations shall
constitute judgments that may be entered and enforced as set forth in such
section.



         9-b.   by agreement with the Hudson river park trust (a
public benefit corporation established pursuant to section five of the Hudson
river park act, chapter five hundred ninety-two of the laws of nineteen
hundred ninety-eight), to enforce the rules and regulations of such trust
relating to the use, government and protection of the Hudson river park,
created pursuant to section four of such act. In addition to or as an
alternative to any of the remedies or penalties provided under any other
provision of law, violation of such rules and regulations shall be punishable
by a civil penalty of not more than five hundred dollars for each violation,
which may be recovered in a proceeding before the environmental control
board. Such proceeding shall be commenced by a notice of violation returnable
before such board. The procedures set forth in section one thousand
forty-nine-a of this charter applicable to the adjudication by the
environmental control board of violations within the jurisdiction of the
commissioner shall apply to the adjudication of violations of such rules and
regulations by such board and final orders of such board imposing civil
penalties for such violations shall constitute judgments that may be entered
and enforced as set forth in such section.



         9-c.   by agreement with the Brooklyn bridge park
corporation (a not-for-profit corporation formed pursuant to section four
hundred two of the not-for-profit corporation law), to enforce the rules and
regulations of such corporation, relating to the use, government and
protection of public parks and recreational facilities within the
jurisdiction of such corporation. In addition to or as an alternative to any
of the remedies or penalties provided under any other provision of law,
violation of such rules and regulations shall be punishable by a civil
penalty of not more than five hundred dollars for each violation, which may
be recovered in a proceeding before the environmental control board. Such
proceeding shall be commenced by a notice of violation returnable before such
board. The procedures set forth in section one thousand forty-nine-a of this
charter applicable to the adjudication by the environmental control board of
violations within the jurisdiction of the commissioner shall apply to the
adjudication of violations of such rules and regulations by such board and
final orders of such board imposing civil penalties for such violations shall
constitute judgments that may be entered and enforced as set forth in such
section.



         10.   to plan, conduct, supervise, coordinate and
promote conservation, environmental, and nature education programs and
research and demonstration projects relating thereto and to plan, acquire,
design, construct, improve, alter, maintain and manage areas and facilities
for conservation and the preservation of natural beauty; and subject to the
approval of the mayor, undertake to enter into arrangements with other city,
state or federal agencies and recommend to the mayor such arrangements with
private, voluntary or commercial agencies, to be entered into subject to the
provisions of law, for the performance of functions relating to conservation
and the preservation of natural beauty;



         11.   to plan, plant and maintain trees and other
plantings and to plan, acquire, design, construct, improve, alter, repair and
maintain works of art,* as same are defined in subdivision a of section eight
hundred fifty-four of the New York city charter, on or over the streets,
avenues, squares, parks, docks, piers or other public places belonging to the
city, except as otherwise provided by law; and, subject to the approval of
the major, undertake to enter into arrangements with other agencies of the
city, state and federal government and recommend to the mayor such
arrangements with private, voluntary or commercial agencies, to be entered
into subject to the provisions of law, for the performance of functions
relating to neighborhood beautification.



      b.   Recreation



         1.   to plan, acquire, construct, improve and manage
facilities for the recreation of the public;



         2.   to plan, develop, conduct and supervise recreation
programs for the public including research and demonstration projects
relating thereto;



         3.   to review and coordinate recreation activities and
programs and facilities conducted by agencies of the city and the budget
estimates submitted by such other agencies for such activities and make such
recommendations to the mayor with respect to them as may be appropriate; and



         4.   to undertake, subject to the approval of the mayor,
and to enter into arrangements with other agencies of the city, state or
federal government and to recommend to the mayor such arrangements with
private, voluntary or commercial agencies to be entered into, subject to the
provisions of law, for the performance of any recreation functions conferred
upon the department by this chapter or otherwise.



(Am. L.L. 2016/070, 6/13/2016, eff. 6/13/2017)



Section 534. Landmarks preservation commission.



Editor's note: Became Section 3020.



Chapter 21-A: New York City Sports Commission



Section 541. New York city sports commission.



   a.   There shall be established a New York city sports commission
consisting of five members who shall serve without compensation, each for a
term of three years. Two members of the commission shall be appointed by the
mayor, and two members shall be appointed by the speaker of the council, and
one member shall be designated as chairperson by the mayor after consultation
with the speaker. The commission may appoint an executive director to serve
at its pleasure and may employ or retain other employees and consultants
within appropriations for such purpose.



   b.   Each member may designate a representative who may vote on
behalf of such member and who shall be counted as a member for the purpose of
determining the existence of a quorum. The designation of a representative
shall be made in prior written notice served upon the chairperson of the
commission.



   c.   The commission shall:



      (1)   make recommendations to insure the continuation and
growth of a healthy environment for professional, amateur and scholastic
sports activities in the city;



      (2)   hold at least one meeting per month;



      (3)   issue a quarterly report to the mayor and the council
detailing the commission's activities during the previous three month period;



      (4)   issue an annual report to the mayor and the council at
the start of each fiscal year detailing the commission's goals for the
upcoming year;



      (5)   submit a proposed annual budget to the council no later
than March thirty-first of each year;



      (6)   seek to promote the city as a positive and profitable
base for professional sports teams wishing to relocate their organizations;
and



      (7)   perform such other duties as may be necessary as
determined by the commission.



Chapter 22: Department of Health and Mental Hygiene



Section 550. Definitions.



   When used in this chapter: the term "mentally disabled" shall mean
those with mental illness, mental retardation, alcoholism, substance
dependence or chemical dependence as these terms are defined in section 1.03
of the mental hygiene law; or any other mental illness or mental condition
placed under the jurisdiction of the department by the mayor; the term
"provider of services" shall mean an individual, association, corporation or
public or private agency which provides for the mentally disabled; and the
term "services for the mentally disabled" shall mean examination, diagnosis,
care, treatment, rehabilitation, training, education, research, preventive
services, referral, residential services or domiciliary care of or for the
mentally disabled, not specifically limited by any other law. Notwithstanding
the foregoing, planning and programs for persons with substance dependence or
chemical dependence shall be conducted by the department, and the department
may act as a "local agency" to conduct substance abuse programs and seek
reimbursement therefore pursuant to provisions of the mental hygiene law
relating to funding for substance abuse services, as deemed appropriate by
the commissioner in recognition of the programs currently administered by the
New York state office of alcoholism and substance abuse services or its
successor agency under article nineteen of the mental hygiene law.



Section 551. Department; commissioner.



   a.   There shall be a department of health and mental hygiene, the
head of which shall be the commissioner of health and mental hygiene who
shall be appointed by the mayor. The department shall have and exercise all
powers of a local health department set forth in law. Notwithstanding any
other provision of this charter to the contrary, the department shall be a
social services district for purposes of the administration of health-related
public assistance programs to the extent agreed upon by the department, the
department of social services and the department of homeless services.
Appropriations to the department for mental health, mental retardation and
alcoholism services shall be set forth in the expense budget in separate and
distinct units of appropriation. In determining the annual amount of city
funds to be appropriated by the city for mental health, mental retardation
and alcoholism services, the following provision shall apply: in the event
that the executive budget proposes a decrease in city funds measured against
the budget for the current fiscal year, as modified in accordance with
section one hundred seven, for the units of appropriation for mental health,
mental retardation and alcoholism services, the executive budget shall not
propose a greater percentage decrease in city funds measured against the
budget for the current fiscal year, as modified in accordance with section
one hundred seven, for the units of appropriation for mental health, mental
retardation and alcoholism services than has been proposed for the units of
appropriation for public health services. If, however, in his or her
discretion, the mayor determines that it is in the city's best interest to
submit an executive budget at variance with the requirements of this
provision, the mayor shall include an explanation of the basis for this
variation as part of the budget message.



   b.   The commissioner shall be a doctor of medicine and:



      (1)   hold a degree of master of public health or a degree of
master of business administration with concentration in the health field or a
degree of master of public administration with concentration in the health
field or the equivalent of any one of the specified foregoing degrees
received from a college or university and have had at least five years'
experience in college or university public health teaching, or



      (2)   have had at least five years' experience in public
health administration.



Section 552. Deputy commissioners.



   The commissioner may appoint deputy commissioners, one of whom shall
have the same qualifications as the commissioner. There shall be at least two
executive deputy commissioners, one of whom shall have the qualifications
established pursuant to the mental hygiene law for a director of community
services of a local governmental unit, and shall be the director within the
department of the division of mental hygiene services. Such division shall be
and shall exercise the powers of a local governmental unit for purposes of
the mental hygiene law, and the executive deputy commissioner heading such
division shall have the powers of a director of community services of a local
governmental unit as set forth in or pursuant to such law, and shall report
directly to the commissioner. In the exercise of such powers, such executive
deputy commissioner shall coordinate the fiscal and programmatic
administration of contracts awarded by the department for mental health,
mental retardation, and alcoholism services.



Section 553. Board of health.



   a.   There shall be in the department a board of health, the
chairperson of which shall be the commissioner. In addition to the
chairperson, the board shall consist of ten members, five of whom shall be
doctors of medicine who shall each have had not less than ten years
experience in any or all of the following: clinical medicine, neurology or
psychiatry, public health administration or college or university public
health teaching. The other five members need not be physicians. However,
non-physician members shall hold at least a masters degree in environmental,
biological, veterinary, physical, or behavioral health or science, or
rehabilitative science or in a related field, and shall have at least ten
years experience in the field in which they hold such degree. One member of
the board shall be the chairperson of the mental hygiene advisory board, as
set forth in section 568 of the charter, provided that such chairperson shall
meet the requirements for board membership of either a physician or
non-physician member.



   b.   The nine members other than the chairperson and the member who
shall be the chairperson of the mental hygiene advisory board shall serve
without compensation and shall be appointed by the mayor, each for a term of
six years, commencing at the expiration of the terms of the present
incumbents. In case of a vacancy the mayor shall appoint a member to serve
for the unexpired term.



   c.   The commissioner shall designate employees of the department as
may be necessary to the service of the board including an employee designated
by him to serve as the secretary of the board.



Section 554. Removal of board members.



   A member of the board of health other than the chairman may be removed
by the mayor on proof of official misconduct or of negligence in official
duties or of conduct in any manner connected with his official duties which
tends to discredit his office, or of mental or physical inability to perform
his duties; provided that prior to removal he shall receive a copy of the
charges and shall be entitled to a hearing before the mayor and to the
assistance of counsel at such hearing.



Section 555. Powers and duties of the commissioner.



   a.   The commissioner shall have all the powers and duties vested in
him or in the department by this chapter or otherwise, except those vested by
law in the board of health and the chief medical examiner. In the performance
of his functions, the commissioner shall have, in addition to such others as
may be conferred upon him from time to time, the power and duty to:



      (1)   Prepare and submit to appropriate governmental
authorities short term, intermediate and long range plans and programs
designed to meet the said needs of the city, including the needs for
construction and operation of medical and health care facilities, and
establish priorities among them, except that the commissioner may not
construct or operate a new medical or health care facility until the health
systems agency having jurisdiction over the institution, as recognized by the
state health planning council, has received, in the case of private
institutions, a copy of the application filed with the commissioner, or in
the case of institutions of the city of New York, information in such form
and detail as the health systems agency shall require, and it shall have
given the commissioner a written decision expressing its approval or
disapproval. The commissioner shall not be bound by this decision but he
shall not approve any construction, addition or modification contrary to the
health systems agency without first holding a public hearing. In reaching
decisions pursuant to this paragraph, the commissioner and the health systems
agency shall consider:



         (a)   The public need for the existence of the new
institution or the construction, addition or modification of an existing
institution at the time and place and under the circumstances proposed;



         (b)   The character, competence and standing in the
community of the owners and licensees, in the case of private institutions;



         (c)   The financial resources of the institution and its
sources of future revenues;



         (d)   The fitness and adequacy of the premises, and
equipment, personnel and standards of care to be used in the operation of the
proposed institution;



         (e)   Any decision of the local community board, on the
institution in the community; and



         (f)   Such matters as each of them considers pertinent.



      (2)   At the conclusion of the second year following the
establishment of the department pursuant to this section, and again at the
conclusion of the fourth year following such establishment, the mayor's
office of operations shall conduct a review and submit a report to the mayor
comparing such periods with the period preceding such establishment with
regard to the department's delivery of mental health, mental retardation and
alcoholism and substance abuse services, the access of consumers and their
families to such services, and the administration and oversight of contracts
for the delivery of such services.



   b.   In the exercise of the commissioner's functions, powers and
duties the commissioner may:



      (1)   Compel the attendance of witnesses, administer oaths and
compel the production of books, papers and documents in any matter or
proceeding before the commissioner.



      (2)   Except as otherwise provided by law, assess any penalty
prescribed for a violation of or a failure to comply with any provision of
this chapter or any lawful notice, order or regulation pursuant thereto, not
exceeding one thousand dollars, which penalty may be assessed after a hearing
or an opportunity to be heard.



Section 556. Functions, powers and duties of the department.



   Except as otherwise provided by law, the department shall have
jurisdiction to regulate all matters affecting health in the city of New York
and to perform all those functions and operations performed by the city that
relate to the health of the people of the city, including but not limited to
the mental health, mental retardation, alcoholism and substance abuse-related
needs of the people of the city. The jurisdiction of the department shall
include but not be limited to the following:



      a.   General functions.



         (1)   Enforce all provisions of law applicable in the
area under the jurisdiction of the department for the preservation of human
life, for the care, promotion and protection of health and relative to the
necessary health supervision of the purity and wholesomeness of the water
supply and the sources thereof;



         (2)   maintain an office in each borough and maintain,
furnish and operate in each borough office health centers and health stations
or other facilities which may be required from time to time for the
preservation of health or the care of the sick;



         (3)   exercise its functions, powers and duties in the
area extending over the city, and over the waters adjacent thereto, within
the jurisdiction of the city and within the quarantine limits as established
by law;



         (4)   receive and expend funds made available for public
health purposes pursuant to law; and



         (5)   arrange, with the approval of the mayor, for the
rendition of services and operation of facilities by other agencies of the
city;



      b.   Review of public health services and general public
health planning.



         (1)   Develop and submit to the mayor and council a
program for the delivery of services for the mentally disabled, including
construction and operation of facilities;



         (2)   determine the needs of the mentally disabled in
the city, which determination shall include the review and evaluation of all
mental hygiene services and facilities within the department's jurisdiction;



         (3)   engage in short-range, intermediate-range and
long-range mental hygiene planning that reflects the entire array of city
needs in the areas of mental health, mental retardation and developmental
disabilities and alcoholism and substance abuse services within the
department's jurisdiction;



         (4)   implement and administer an inclusive citywide
planning process for the delivery of services for people with mental
disabilities; and design and incorporate within that planning process,
consistent with applicable law, standards and procedures for community
participation and communication with the commissioner at the borough and
local community level;



         (5)   establish coordination and cooperation among all
providers of services for the mentally disabled, coordinate the department's
program with the program of the state department of mental hygiene so that
there is a continuity of care among all providers of services, and seek to
cooperate by mutual agreement with the state department of mental hygiene and
its representatives and with institutions in such department and their
representatives in pre-admission screening and in post-hospital care of
persons suffering from mental disability;



         (6)   receive and expend funds made available for the
purposes of providing mental health, mental retardation and developmental
disability and alcoholism and substance abuse related services;



         (7)   administer the unit responsible for early
intervention services pursuant to the public health law; and



         (8)   in accordance with section five hundred fifty-five
of this chapter, determine the public health needs of the city and prepare
plans and programs addressing such needs.



      c.   Supervision of matters affecting public health.



         (1)   Supervise and control the registration of births,
fetal deaths and deaths;



         (2)   supervise the reporting and control of
communicable and chronic diseases and conditions hazardous to life and
health; exercise control over and supervise the abatement of nuisances
affecting or likely to affect the public health;



         (3)   make policy and plan for, monitor, evaluate and
exercise general supervision over all services and facilities for the
mentally disabled within the department's jurisdiction; and exercise general
supervisory authority, through the promulgation of appropriate standards
consistent with accepted professional practices for the care and treatment of
patients within such services and facilities for the mentally disabled within
the department's jurisdiction;



         (4)   except as otherwise provided by law, analyze and
monitor hospitals, clinics, nursing homes, and homes for the aged, and
analyze, evaluate, supervise and regulate clinical laboratories, blood banks,
and related facilities providing medical and health services and services
ancillary thereto;



         (5)   to the extent necessary to carry out the
provisions of this chapter, the mental hygiene law and other applicable laws
and when not inconsistent with any other law, arrange for the visitation,
inspection and investigation of all providers of services for the mentally
disabled, by the department or otherwise;



         (6)   conduct such inquiries into services and
facilities for the mentally disabled as may be useful in performing the
functions of the department, including investigations into individual patient
care, and for such purpose the department may exercise the powers set forth
in section five hundred fifty-five of this chapter and shall, consistent with
the provisions of the mental hygiene law, have access to otherwise
confidential patient records, provided such information is requested pursuant
to the functions, powers and duties conferred upon the department by law;



         (7)   supervise and regulate the public health aspects
of water supply and sewage disposal and water pollution;



         (8)   supervise and regulate the public health aspects
of the production, processing and distribution of milk, cream and milk
products, except for such inspection, regulation and supervision of the
sanitary quality of milk and cream distributed, consumed or sold within the
city as performed by the New York department of agriculture and markets
pursuant to section seventy-one-l of the agriculture and markets law;



         (9)   supervise and regulate the food and drug supply of
the city and other businesses and activities affecting public health in the
city, and ensure that such businesses and activities are conducted in a
manner consistent with the public interest and by persons with good
character, honesty and integrity;



         (10)   supervise and regulate the removal,
transportation and disposal of human remains;



         (11)   supervise and regulate the public health aspects
of ionizing radiation, the handling and disposal of radioactive wastes, and
the activities within the city affecting radioactive materials, excluding
special nuclear materials in quantities sufficient to form a critical mass;
and



         (12)   in furtherance of the purposes of this chapter
and the mental hygiene law, make rules and regulations covering the provision
of services by providers of services for the mentally disabled.



      d.   Promotion or provision of public health services.



         (1)   Maintain and operate public health centers and
clinics as shall be established in the department;



         (2)   engage in or promote health research for the
purpose of improving the quality of medical and health care; in conducting
such research, the department shall have the authority to conduct medical
audits, to receive reports on forms prepared or prescribed by the department;
such information when received by the department shall be kept confidential
and used solely for the purpose of medical or scientific research or the
improvement of the quality of medical care;



         (3)   produce, standardize and distribute certain
diagnostic, preventive and therapeutic products and conduct laboratory
examinations for the diagnosis, prevention and control of disease;



         (4)   promote or provide for public education on mental
disability and the prevention and control of disease;



         (5)   promote or provide for programs for the prevention
and control of disease and for the prevention, diagnosis, care, treatment,
social and vocational rehabilitation, special education and training of the
mentally disabled;



         (6)   promote or provide diagnostic and therapeutic
services for maternity and child health, family planning, communicable
disease, medical rehabilitation and other diseases and conditions affecting
public health;



         (7)   promote or provide medical and health services for
school children and the ambulant sick and needy persons of the city;



         (8)   promote or provide medical and health services for
the inmates of prisons maintained and operated by the city;



         (9)   within the amounts appropriated therefor, enter
into contracts for the rendition or operation of services and facilities for
the mentally disabled on a per capita basis or otherwise, including contracts
executed pursuant to subdivision e of section 41.19 of the mental hygiene law;



         (10)   within the amounts appropriated therefor, execute
such programs and maintain such facilities for the mentally disabled as may
be authorized under such appropriations; and



         (11)   use the services and facilities of public or
private voluntary institutions whenever practical, and encourage all
providers of services to cooperate with or participate in the program of
services for the mentally disabled, whether by contract or otherwise.



      e.   Other functions.



         (1)   Prior to the sale, closing, abandonment of a city
hospital or transfer of a city hospital to any other hospital or facility,
hold a public hearing with reference to such proposed sale, closing,
abandonment or transfer; publish notice of such public hearing in the City
Record and in such daily newspaper or newspapers published in the city of New
York as shall be selected by the commissioner, such publication to take place
not less than ten days nor more than thirty days prior to the date fixed for
the hearing; and adjourn such hearing from time to time, if necessary, in
order to allow persons interested to attend or express their views;



         (2)   submit all materials required by the mental
hygiene law for purposes of state reimbursement;



         (3)   provide for membership on such state or federally
authorized committees as may be appropriate to the discharge of the
department's functions, powers and duties; and



         (4)   perform such other acts as may be necessary and
proper to carry out the provisions of this chapter and the purposes of the
mental hygiene law.



Section 557. Chief medical examiner.



   (a)   There shall be in the department an independent office of
chief medical examiner, the head of which shall be the chief medical
examiner, who shall be appointed by the mayor from the classified civil
service and be a doctor of medicine and a skilled pathologist and
microscopist. The mayor may remove the chief medical examiner upon filing in
the office of the commissioner of citywide administrative services and
serving upon the chief medical examiner his or her reasons therefor and
allowing such officer an opportunity of making a public explanation.



   (b)   The commissioner with respect to the office of chief medical
examiner shall exercise the powers and duties set forth in paragraph one of
subdivision a of section five hundred fifty-five of this chapter, but shall
not interfere with the performance by the chief medical examiner or his or
her office of the powers and duties prescribed by the provisions of this
section or any other law.



   (c)   The chief medical examiner may appoint and remove such deputy
chief medical examiners, medical examiners, medical investigators, lay
medical investigators, scientific experts and other officers and employees as
may be provided for in the budget. The deputy chief medical examiners and
medical examiners shall possess the same basic qualifications as the chief
medical examiner. The medical investigators shall be physicians duly licensed
to practice medicine in the state of New York and shall possess such
additional qualifications as may be required by the department of citywide
administrative services.



   (d)   The office shall be kept open every day in the year, including
Sundays and legal holidays, with a clerk in attendance at all times during
the day and night.



   (e)   The chief medical examiner or his or her designee shall have
power to require the attendance and take testimony under oath of such persons
as he or she may deem necessary and to require the production of books,
accounts, papers and other evidence relative to any matter within the
jurisdiction of the office.



   (f)   (1)   The chief medical examiner shall have such powers and
duties as may be provided by law in respect to bodies of person dying from
criminal violence, by accident, by suicide, suddenly when in apparent health,
when unattended by a physician, in a correctional facility or in any
suspicious or unusual manner or where an application is made pursuant to law
for a permit to cremate a body of a person.



      (2)   The chief medical examiner shall perform the functions
of the city mortuary and related functions, including the removal,
transportation and disposal of unclaimed or unidentified human remains and
the remains of those individuals who have died outside of a medical
institution.



      (3)   The chief medical examiner may, to the extent permitted
by law, provide forensic and related testing and analysis, and ancillary
services, in furtherance of investigations concerning persons both alive and
deceased, including but not limited to: performing autopsies; performing
deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) testing and other forms of genetic testing and
analysis; obtaining samples and exemplars; performing pathology, histology
and toxicology testing and analysis; and determining the cause or manner of
injuries and/or death.



      (4)   Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of this
section and in addition to any other powers and duties, the chief medical
examiner may engage in health research in conjunction with the department
consistent with paragraph two of subdivision d of section five hundred fifty
six of this chapter.



   (g)   The chief medical examiner shall keep full and complete
records in such form as may be provided by law. The chief medical examiner
shall promptly deliver to the appropriate district attorney copies of all
records relating to every death as to which there is, in the judgment of the
medical examiner in charge, any indication of criminality. Such records shall
not be open to public inspection.



Section 558. Health code.



   (a)   The health code which is in force in the city on the date on
which this chapter takes effect and all existing provisions of law fixing
penalties for violation of the code and all regulations of the board of
health on file with the city clerk on the date when this chapter takes effect
shall continue to be binding and in force except as amended or repealed from
time to time. Such code shall have the force and effect of law.



   (b)   The board of health from time to time may add to and alter,
amend or repeal any part of the health code, and may therein publish
additional provisions for security of life and health in the city and confer
additional powers on the department not inconsistent with the constitution,
laws of this state or this charter, and may provide for the enforcement of
the health code or any orders made by the commissioner or the board of
health, by such fines, penalties, forfeitures and imprisonment as may be
prescribed therein or otherwise by law.



   (c)   The board of health may embrace in the health code all matters
and subjects to which the power and authority of the department extends. The
board of health shall prescribe in the health code the persons who shall be
required to keep a registry of birth, fetal deaths, and deaths occurring in
the city and file certifications thereof with the department and the form and
manner in which such registry shall be kept and certificates filed, and, it
shall provide for the recording of births which have not been recorded in
accordance with law, for the change or alteration of any birth, fetal death
or death certificate upon proof satisfactory, to the commissioner, for the
examination and issuance of transcripts of such certificates and for fees to
be charged therefor.



   (d)   The board of health shall prescribe in the health code that
the parent with legal custody or legal guardian of any child receiving day
care services as authorized in such code shall have unlimited and on demand
access to such child or ward. The department of health and mental hygiene
shall make unannounced visits of such day care services if such board
receives a complaint that, if true, would indicate that children in such
services are not receiving adequate or appropriate care. Such board shall
also prescribe in such code that during the period for which day care
services are authorized upon any premises, the department shall whenever
possible make at least one unannounced visit of every such premises annually.



   (e)   Any violation of the health code shall be treated and punished
as a misdemeanor. The board of health or an administrative tribunal
established by the board of health to enforce the provisions of the health
code shall have the power to enforce its final decisions and orders imposing
pecuniary penalties as if they were money judgments, without court
proceedings, in the manner described herein. After four months from the
issuance of such a final decision and order by such board or tribunal a copy
of such decision and order shall be filed in the office of the clerk of any
county within the city. In the event that the decision and order were issued
as a result of the respondent being in default, a notice of default shall be
mailed to such respondent at least seven days before such filing, and a copy
of such notice and a receipt of mailing thereof shall be filed with the copy
of such decision and order. Upon such filing, such county clerk shall enter
and docket such decision and order, in the same manner and with the same
effect as a money judgment. Upon such entry and docketing, such decision and
order may be enforced as provided in article fifty-two of the civil practice
law and rules. Such board or tribunal shall not enter any final decision or
order pursuant to the provisions of this subdivision unless the notice of
violation shall have been served in the same manner as is prescribed for
service of process by article three of the civil practice law and rules or
article three of the business corporation law. Such board or tribunal may
apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for enforcement of any other
decision, order or subpoena issued by such board or tribunal. Nothing herein
contained shall be construed to limit or abridge the board's or the
department's right to pursue any other remedy prescribed by law. Pecuniary
penalties for violations of the health code may be recovered in a civil
action before any court in the city having jurisdiction of civil actions.



   (f)   No amendment or addition to the health code or repeal of any
provision thereof adopted by the board of health subsequent to the effective
date of this chapter shall become valid and effective until a copy of such
amendment, addition or repeal is duly certified by the person serving as
secretary of the board.



   (g)   The board of health may add, amend and repeal regulations in
regard to any matter contained in the health code, and such regulations shall
have the same force and effect as a provision of the health code.



   (h)   No action shall abate, or right of action already accrued be
abolished, by reason of the expiration, repeal or amendment of any provision
of the health code or regulations in regard thereto.



Section 559. Seal.



   The commissioner, with the concurrence of the board of health, may
adopt a seal which may be used for the authentication of the orders and
proceedings of the board and of the department and in commissioning the
officers and agents of the department and otherwise as may be provided for by
the commissioner or in the health code.



Section 560. Temporary hospitals during epidemic or imminent peril.



   The board of health, during the prevalence of an epidemic or in the
presence of great and imminent peril to the public health and when in the
board's judgment it is necessary to do so, may take possession of any
buildings in the city for temporary hospitals and shall pay a just
compensation for any private property so taken. Such temporary hospitals
shall be under the control of the commissioner.



Section 561. Permits.



   a.   The board of health in its discretion may grant, suspend or
revoke permits for businesses or other matters in respect to any subject
dealt with in the health code and regulated by the department and may
prescribe reasonable fees for the issuance of said permits. Whenever the
board of health in the health code authorizes the issuance, suspension or
revocation of a permit by the commissioner, his action shall be subject to
review by the board of health upon an appeal by the party aggrieved under
such rules as the board may provide. Such rules may provide in what cases an
appeal may stay the action of the commissioner until final determination by
the board of health, but notwithstanding any such rule the board of health
shall have power to grant or refuse a stay in any particular case.



   b.   Every application for a permit or a renewal of an existing
permit issued by the commissioner pursuant to this section shall provide an
opportunity for the applicant to indicate the language in which such
applicant would prefer that inspections in connection with such permit be
conducted or alternatively for which language interpretation services be
provided. Nothing in this subdivision nor any failure to comply with such
preference shall be construed so as to create a cause of action or constitute
a defense in any legal, administrative, or other proceeding.



Section 562. Failure to observe order; penalty.



   Except in cases where it is otherwise provided by law, every violation,
neglect or refusal by any person to comply with any order of the commissioner
or the board of health shall be triable by a judge of the New York city
criminal court and shall be treated and punished as a misdemeanor.



Section 563. Declaration of imminent peril.



   In the presence of great and imminent peril to the public health, the
board of health, having first taken and filed among its records what it
regards as sufficient proof to authorize a declaration of such peril, shall
take such measures, and order the department to do such acts beyond those
duly provided for the preservation of the public health, including the power
to take possession of and occupy as a hospital any building or buildings in
the city, as the board, in good faith may declare the public safety and
health to demand, and the mayor shall in writing approve. No expenditure
shall be incurred in the exercise of such extraordinary power, however,
unless provision is made therefor in the budget or unless such expenditures
are financed pursuant to sections one hundred seven or section 29.00 of the
local finance law. Such peril shall exist when and for such period of time as
the board of health and mayor declare.



Section 564. Suits and service of papers.



   The department may sue and be sued in and by the proper name of
"Department of Health and Mental Hygiene of the City of New York", and
service of all process in suits and proceedings against or affecting the
department, or other papers, may be made upon the commissioner or official
designated by him, and not otherwise; except that, according to usual
practice in other suits, papers in suits to which the department is a party
may be served on the corporation counsel or such assistant as may be assigned
by him to the department.



Section 566. Right of entry of officers of department.



   The commissioner and such officers or employees of the department as
are designated by him may, at reasonable times, and pursuant to a search
warrant when required by law, without fee or hindrance enter, examine and
inspect all vessels, premises, grounds, structures, buildings and every part
thereof and all underground passages of every sort in the city for compliance
with the provisions of law enforced by the department and its rules and
regulations and may make plans, drawings and descriptions thereof, according
to the regulations of the department. The owner or his agent or
representative and the lessee or occupant of any such premises, grounds,
structures, buildings and every part thereof and all underground passages of
every sort in the city and every part thereof and every person having the
care and management thereof, shall at all reasonable times, when required by
any such officers or employees, give them free access thereto, and refusal so
to do shall be triable by a judge of the New York city criminal court and
shall be treated and punished as a misdemeanor.



Section 567. Acceptance of private funds.



   No grant, gift, devise, legacy or bequest made to the city or to the
department for work to be done within the jurisdiction of the department
shall be accepted, and no work or research paid for from private sources
shall be carried on under the jurisdiction of the department except with the
approval of the commissioner.



Section 568. Mental hygiene advisory board.



   a.   (1)   There shall be a mental hygiene advisory board which
shall be advisory to the commissioner and the deputy commissioner for mental
hygiene services in the development of community mental health, mental
retardation, alcoholism and substance abuse facilities and services and
programs related thereto. The board shall have separate subcommittees for
mental health, for mental retardation and developmental disabilities, and for
alcoholism and substance abuse. The board and its subcommittees shall be
constituted and their appointive members appointed and removed in the manner
prescribed for a community services board by the provisions of the mental
hygiene law. Pursuant to the provisions of such law, such members may be
reappointed without limitation on the number of consecutive terms which they
may serve.



      (2)   Members of the mental hygiene advisory board and its
subcommittees shall serve thereon without compensation except that each
member shall be allowed actual and necessary expenses to be audited in the
same manner as other city charges.



      (3)   No person shall be ineligible for membership on the
board or its subcommittees because such person holds any other public office,
employment or trust, nor shall any person be made ineligible to or forfeit
such person's right to any public office, employment or trust by reason of
such appointment.



   b.   (1)   Contracts for services and facilities under this
chapter may be made with a public or private voluntary hospital, clinic,
laboratory, health, welfare or mental hygiene agency or other similar
institution, notwithstanding that any member of the board or its
subcommittees is an officer or employee of such institution or agency or is a
member of the medical or consultant staff thereof.



      (2)   If any matter arises before the board or any of its
subcommittees directly involving a public or private voluntary hospital,
clinic, laboratory, health, welfare or mental hygiene agency or other similar
institution of which any member of the board or such subcommittee is an
officer, employee or on the medical or consultant staff thereof, that member
shall participate in the deliberations of the board or of such subcommittee
on the matter only insofar as to provide any information requested of such
person by the other members of the board or subcommittee, and that member
shall not participate further in the deliberations of the board or
subcommittee on the matter after having provided the required information.



Section 569. Construction clause.



   The provisions of this chapter relating to services for the mentally
disabled shall be carried out subject to and in conjunction with the
provisions of the mental hygiene law.



Chapter 23: Department of Mental Health, Mental Retardation and Alcoholism
Services [Repealed]



Chapter 24: Department of Social Services



Section 601. Department; commissioner.



   There shall be a department of social services the head of which shall
be the commissioner of social services.



Section 602. Deputies.



   The commissioner may appoint three deputies.



Section 603. Powers and duties.



   Except as otherwise provided in chapters 24-A and 24-B, the
commissioner shall have the powers and perform the duties of a commissioner
of social services under the social services law, provided that no form of
outdoor relief shall be dispensed by the city except under the provisions of
a state or local law which shall specifically provide the method, manner and
conditions of dispensing the same.



Section 604. Public institutions under the commissioner.



   The commissioner shall control, maintain and operate such institutions
as are now or may be put under his or her control.



Section 605. Powers and duties of the commissioner of homeless services.
[Repealed]



 



Chapter 24-A: Department of Homeless Services



Section 610. Department; commissioner.



   There shall be a department of homeless services, the head of which
shall be the commissioner of homeless services.



Section 611. Deputies.



   The commissioner shall appoint at least one deputy.



Section 612. Powers and duties.



   a.   The commissioner shall have the powers and perform the duties
of a commissioner of social services under the social services law for the
purpose of fulfilling his or her responsibilities under this chapter. In the
performance of his or her functions, the commissioner shall:



      1.   be responsible for transitional housing and services
provided by the city for eligible homeless families and individuals. The
commissioner shall encourage the participation of and receive proposals from
the public and private sectors for the development of transitional housing
and services for homeless families and individuals. In performing such
duties, the commissioner may develop and issue requests for proposals and
evaluate responses thereto, negotiate, award, enter into and administer
contracts, loans or other agreements, award and administer grants and obtain
all necessary approvals. For-profit and not-for-profit entities shall be
eligible to submit proposals, bid on contracts and other agreements, and
apply for grants and loans;



      2.   develop, maintain and, where necessary, strengthen the
system for the provision of transitional housing and services for homeless
families and individuals;



      3.   in consultation with other appropriate governmental
agencies, plan housing for homeless families and individuals;



      4.   maintain, repair and rehabilitate transitional housing
owned, operated or managed by the department;



      5.   establish performance criteria, goals and objectives with
respect to contract providers and monitor and evaluate such performance;



      6.   participate in the development of prevention programs to
assist families and individuals who are in imminent danger of becoming
homeless;



      7.   in consultation with other appropriate governmental
agencies, develop and operate outreach programs to identify and assist
families and individuals who are homeless and living in public spaces.
Notwithstanding any outreach programs developed or operated by other city
agencies, and outreach programs developed or operated by any entity pursuant
to a contract with the department, the commissioner shall retain a
substantial outreach workforce within the department's full-time staff.
Beginning on the first day of September, 1998 and on the first day of each
succeeding calendar quarter thereafter, the commissioner shall report to the
speaker of the council in writing on the outreach programs operated by the
department, by other city agencies or by entities contracting with the
department. Such report shall include, but not be limited to, the number of
contacts during the reporting period, the number of placements in
transitional housing resulting from such contacts during the reporting period
and the number of referrals of persons so contacted to programs or services
during the reporting period;



      8.   direct and supervise the management, operations, budget
and funding of services for homeless individuals and families;



      9.   work directly with the mayor's office of management and
budget with regard to the funding and administration of the city's budget for
services to homeless families and individuals; and



      10.   advise and assist the mayor with respect to matters
pertaining to homeless families and individuals.



   b.   In addition to the duties set forth in subdivision a of this
section, the commissioner is authorized, in consultation with appropriate
agencies, to provide any other services he or she deems necessary to
implement and effectuate the provisions of this chapter.



Section 613. Transitional housing inventory.



   Beginning on May 1, 1999 and on May first of each succeeding year
thereafter, the commissioner shall report to the speaker of the council in
writing on the transitional housing maintained by the department and such
transitional housing operated by any entity pursuant to a contract with the
department. Such report shall include, but not be limited to, the percentage
and types of transitional housing disaggregated by the borough in which they
are located.



Section 614. Permanent housing needs, annual report.



   Beginning on May 1, 1999 and on May first of each succeeding year
thereafter, the commissioner shall report to the speaker of the council in
writing on the permanent housing and the transitional housing and services,
respectively, projected to be needed to house homeless families and
individuals expected to be housed within the system during the fiscal year to
begin on each July first thereafter. Such annual report shall include, but
not be limited to, the sources, including, but not being limited to, the
department of housing preservation and development and the New York city
housing authority, from which the commissioner of homeless services projects
to meet the permanent housing identified in such report as needed during such
fiscal year and the number of permanent housing to be provided by each source.



Chapter 24-B: Administration For Children's Services



Section 615. Administration; commissioner.



   There shall be an administration for children's services, the head of
which shall be the commissioner of children's services.



Section 616. Deputies.



   The commissioner shall appoint at least three deputy commissioners.



Section 617. Powers and duties.



   a.   The commissioner shall have the powers and perform the duties
of a commissioner of social services under the social services law for the
purpose of fulfilling his or her responsibilities under this section. The
commissioner shall have the power to perform functions related to the care
and protection of children including, but not limited to:



      1.   performing the functions of a child protective service,
including without limitation, the receipt and investigation of reports of
child abuse and maltreatment;



      2.   providing children and families with preventative
services for the purpose of averting the impairment or disruption of families
which could result in the placement of children in foster care; enabling
children placed in foster care to return to their families; and reducing the
likelihood that a child who has been discharged from foster care may return
to such care;



      3.   providing suitable and appropriate care for children who
are in the care, custody, or guardianship of the commissioner;



      4.   providing appropriate daycare, Head Start and other
child-care services; and



      5.   providing services to ensure that legally responsible
parents provide child support.



   b.   Wherever the powers and duties of an agency other than the
administration for children's services as set forth in the charter or
administrative code confer any authority over the areas of child welfare,
child development or child support enforcement within the jurisdiction of the
commissioner of children's services pursuant to section six hundred seventeen
of this chapter, such powers and duties shall be deemed to be within the
jurisdiction of the administration for children's services and shall be
exercised by such administration; provided that such other agency may
exercise such powers and duties where required by state or federal law, or,
with respect to child support enforcement or determinations of eligibility
for subsidized child care, by the department of social services as directed
by the mayor.



   c.   No agency practice, including but not limited to any tracking
system, record keeping or reporting system or data collection system or
device, may prejudice the rights of, stigmatize or otherwise harm a person
because of his or her gender or relationship to a child or children involved
in a child protective matter. To the extent that requirements of this
subdivision are subject to state approval, the agency will request permission
to make any changes in policy necessary to comply with the provisions of this
subdivision within ninety days of the effective date of the local law that
added this subdivision. The agency shall promulgate such rules as are
necessary for the purposes of implementing and carrying out the provisions of
this subdivision.



Section 618. [Additional powers and duties.]



   The commissioner shall, in addition:



      a.   establish, initiate, control, maintain and operate secure
and non-secure facilities for the temporary care and maintenance away from
their own homes only of children alleged to be or adjudicated as juvenile
delinquents and only of children alleged, adjudicated or convicted as
juvenile offenders in detention as defined in subdivision one of section five
hundred ten-a of the executive law;



      b.   contract with other public and private agencies for such
services, in order to ensure that adequate, suitable, and conveniently
accessible accommodations and proper care will be available when required for
detention, within the appropriations available therefore;



      c.   establish such regulations for the operation of secure
and non-secure detention facilities as may be necessary and not inconsistent
with state or local law or with applicable rules and regulations of any state
or city agency having jurisdiction. Notwithstanding any other provision of
law, the commissioner shall provide or secure the availability of
conveniently accessible and adequate non-secure detention facilities,
certified by the state office of children and family services, as resources
for the courts in the city of New York pursuant to provisions of the family
court act, the criminal procedure law, and section five hundred ten-a of the
executive law;



      d.   develop, implement and maintain systems to collect, store
and disseminate data concerning juvenile delinquency, juvenile crime and the
juvenile justice system;



      e.   participate with other city agencies in the development,
implementation and maintenance of a juvenile justice information system, to
include (i) an index of records of the family court and department of
probation related to proceedings conducted pursuant to article three of the
family court act, and (ii) other information, including but not limited to
age, sex, race, date of birth, charges, dispositions, warrants, calendar
information and case management data connected with such cases, such records
to be made available to the family court, the probation department, and an
agency with which the child is placed or committed upon request, and
otherwise to be kept confidential except as provided by law;



      f.   plan, develop, conduct and supervise programs, including
diversion and aftercare for previously detained juveniles, for the prevention
of juvenile delinquency and juvenile crime and for youths arrested, charged,
adjudicated or convicted of having committed delinquent or criminal acts, and
conduct research and demonstration projects related thereto.



Section 619. Advisory board.



   a.   There shall be in the department a juvenile justice advisory
board consisting of eleven members.



   b.   It shall be the duty of the board to advise the commissioner
and make recommendations. The board shall submit an annual report of its
activities to the mayor.



   c.   The members of the board shall be appointed by the mayor and
shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor. Five of the members, one resident
from each of the five boroughs of New York city, shall be recommended for
appointment by a majority vote of the council members of the respective
borough.



   d.   The mayor shall designate one of the members of the board to be
chair and one to be vice chair, neither of whom shall be employees of the
city of New York.



   e.   The members of the board shall serve without compensation.



Chapter 25: Department of Correction



Section 621. Department; commissioner.



   There shall be a department of correction the head of which shall be
the commissioner of correction.



Section 622. Deputies.



   The commissioner may appoint two deputies.



Section 623. Powers of commissioner.



   The commissioner shall have:



      1.   Charge and management of all institutions of the city,
including all hospital wards therein for the care and custody of felons,
misdemeanants, all prisoners under arrest awaiting arraignment who require
hospital care, including those requiring psychiatric observation or treatment
and violators of ordinances or local laws and for the detention of witnesses
who are unable to furnish security for their appearance in criminal
proceedings, except such places for the detention of prisoners or persons
charged with crime as are by law placed under the charge of some other agency.



      2.   Sole power and authority concerning the care, custody and
control of all court pens for the detention of prisoners while in the
criminal courts of the city of New York, the family court of the state of New
York within the city of New York, the supreme court in the counties of New
York, Bronx, Kings, Queens and Richmond and of all vehicles employed in the
transportation of prisoners who have been sentenced, are awaiting trial or
are held for any other cause.



      3.   Charge and management of persons or any other institution
of the city placed under his jurisdiction by law.



      4.   All authority, except as otherwise provided by law,
concerning the care and custody of felons, misdemeanants and violators of
local laws held in the institutions under his charge.



      5.   All authority in relation to the custody and
transportation of persons held for any cause in criminal proceedings and all
prisoners under arrest awaiting arraignment who require hospital care,
including those requiring psychiatric observation or treatment, in any county
within the city.



      6.   General supervision and responsibility for the planning
and implementation of re-training, counseling and rehabilitative programs for
felons, misdemeanants and violators of local laws who have been sentenced and
are held in institutions under his charge.



Section 624. Cleaning and maintenance of buildings.



   The commissioner shall maintain and operate buildings and structures
under his jurisdiction. The commissioner may construct such additions and
repairs to buildings under his jurisdiction as can be accomplished by the use
of the labor of persons under his care and custody and with materials in the
possession of the department.



Section 625. Labor of prisoners.



   Every inmate of an institution under the authority of the commissioner
shall be employed in some form of industry, in farming operations or other
employment, and products thereof shall be utilized in the institutions under
the commissioner or in any other agency. Those persons held for trial may be
employed in the same manner as sentenced prisoners, provided they give their
consent in writing. Such inmates or prisoners held for trial may be detailed
by the commissioner to perform work or service on the grounds and buildings
or on any public improvement under the charge of any other agency.



Section 626. Board of correction.



Editor's note: this section has been amended by L.L. 2019/133, 7/14/2019,
eff. 1/14/2020.



   a.   There shall be a city board of correction to consist of nine
members. Members shall be appointed for a term of six years. Vacancies shall
be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term. Three members shall be
appointed by the mayor, three by the council, and three by the mayor on the
nomination jointly by the presiding justices of the appellate division of the
supreme court for the first and second judicial departments. Appointments
shall be made by the three respective appointing authorities on a rotating
basis to fill any vacancy occurring on or after the effective date of this
charter. Members of the board may be reimbursed for expenses incurred in the
performance of their duties. The chairman of the board shall be designated
from time to time by the mayor from among its members. Members of the board
may be removed by the mayor for cause and after a hearing at which they shall
be entitled to representation by counsel.



   b.   The board shall adopt rules to govern its own proceedings. The
board may appoint an executive director to serve at its pleasure with such
duties and responsibilities as the board may assign, and other professional,
clerical, and support personnel within appropriations for such purpose. The
commissioner shall designate such of the department's stenographic, clerical
and other assistance to the board as may be necessary for the proper
performance of its functions. The commissioner may attend meetings of the
board but shall not be a member of it.



   c.   The board, or by written designation of the board, any member
of it, the executive director, or other employee, shall have the following
powers and duties:



      1.   The inspection and visitation at any time of all
institutions and facilities under the jurisdiction of the department;



      2.   The inspection of all books, records, documents, and
papers of the department;



      3.   The preparation for submission to the mayor, the council,
and the commissioner of proposals for capital planning and improvements;
studies and reports concerned with the development of the department's
correctional program planning; and studies and reports in regard to methods
of promoting closer cooperation of custodial, probation, and parole agencies
of government and the courts; and



      4.   The evaluation of departmental performance.



   d.   The board, annually and at such other times as it may
determine, shall submit to the mayor, the council, and the commissioner
reports, findings and recommendations in regard to the matters within its
jurisdiction.



   e.   The board shall establish minimum standards for the care,
custody, correction, treatment, supervision, and discipline of all persons
held or confined under the jurisdiction of the department; and it shall
promulgate such minimum standards in rules and regulations after giving the
mayor and commissioner an opportunity to review and comment on the proposed
standards, or amendments or additions to such standards.



   f.   The board shall establish procedures for the hearing of
grievances, complaints or requests for assistance (1) by or on behalf of any
person held or confined under the jurisdiction of the department or (2) by
any employee of the department. The board, or by written designation, a
member of the board or the executive director, may conduct hearings, or study
or investigate any matter within the jurisdiction of the department, and the
board may make recommendations and submit reports of its findings to the
appropriate authorities.



   g.   Within the scope of its authority pursuant to this section, the
board may compel the attendance of witnesses, require the production of
books, accounts, papers and other evidence, administer oaths, examine
persons, and conduct public or private hearings, studies and investigations.
The board may institute proceedings in a court of appropriate jurisdiction to
enforce its subpoena power and other authority pursuant to this section.



Section 627. Council members authorized to visit correctional facilities.



   Any council member is authorized to inspect and visit at any time the
institutions and facilities under the jurisdiction of the department.



Chapter 26: Department of Buildings



Section 641. Department; commissioner.



   There shall be a department of buildings, the head of which shall be
the commissioner of buildings. The commissioner or the first deputy
commissioner shall be a registered architect or a licensed professional
engineer in good standing under the education law.



Section 642. Deputies.



   The commissioner shall appoint two deputies, one of whom shall be the
first deputy commissioner. The commissioner may, by instrument in writing
filed with the department, designate a deputy commissioner who is a
registered architect or a licensed professional engineer to possess any of
the powers granted to the commissioner by subdivision (b) or (d) of section
six hundred forty-five of this chapter. The deputy commissioner so designated
shall possess such powers in addition to any other powers that may be
assigned to him or her by the commissioner pursuant to any other provision of
law.



Section 643. Department; functions.



   The department shall enforce, with respect to buildings and structures,
such provisions of the building code, zoning resolution, multiple dwelling
law, labor law and other laws, rules and regulations as may govern the
construction, alteration, maintenance, use, occupancy, safety, sanitary
conditions, mechanical equipment and inspection of buildings or structures in
the city, and shall perform the functions of the city of New York relating to



      (1)   the designation of buildings and structures as unsafe
and the necessary legal action in relation thereto prior to the removal of
the unsafe condition through demolition or sealing except as provided in
section eighteen hundred two of this charter;



      (2)   the shoring of hazardous and unsafe buildings and
structures;



      (3)   the testing and approval of power-operated cranes and
derricks used for construction, alteration, demolition, excavation and
maintenance purposes, including such uses in highways or sewers, or used to
hoist or lower any article on the outside of any building, excluding cranes
and derricks used in industrial plants or yards;



      (4)   the location, construction, alteration and removal of
signs, illuminated or non-illuminated, attached to the exterior of any
building or structure;



      (5)   (i) all surface and subsurface construction within the
curb line, including curb cuts and driveways, the covering thereof and
entrances thereto and the issuance of permits in reference thereto, (ii) in
conjunction with the issuance of permits for surface and subsurface
construction within the curbline, such surface and subsurface construction
outside the curbline as shall be expressly delegated to the department in the
administrative code and the issuance of permits in relation thereto and,
(iii) notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of section fourteen hundred
three of this charter, in conjunction with the issuance of a permit for the
construction of a building, the commissioner may approve the installation of
and issue a permit for the construction of an individual on site private
sewage disposal system for the premises. Such permit shall be issued in
accordance with standards and specifications prescribed by the commissioner,
in consultation with the commissioner of environmental protection, for the
installation of individual on site private sewage disposal systems;



      (6)   the regulation, inspection and testing of gas and
electricity used for light, heat and power purposes, electric, gas and steam
meters, electric wires and all lights furnished to the city; and



      (7)   the regulation, inspection and testing of electric wires
and wiring apparatus and other appliances used or to be used for the
transmission of electricity for electric light, heat, power, signaling,
communication, alarm and data transmission in or on any building or structure
in the city; provided, however, that the jurisdiction of the department,
except for the testing and approval of power-operated cranes and derricks
used for construction, alteration, demolition, excavation and maintenance
purposes and the licensing of the operators of such equipment, the
regulation, inspection and testing of gas and electricity used for light,
heat and power purposes, electric, gas and steam meters, electric wires and
lights and the regulation, inspection and testing of wiring and appliances
for electric light, heat and power, shall not extend to waterfront property
owned by the city and under the jurisdiction of the department of ports,
international trade and commerce, or to the following structures on any such
waterfront property; wharves, piers, docks, bulkheads, structures wholly or
partly thereon, or to such other structures used in conjunction with or in
furtherance of waterfront commerce or navigation, or to bridges, tunnels or
subways or structures appurtenant thereto.



Section 644. Department; powers.



Editor's note: bracketed out of law at General Election, November 8, 1988.



Section 645. Offices of the department; powers and duties.



   (a)   There shall be a main office of the department and in each
borough at least one branch office and a borough superintendent. Persons
appointed as inspectors to perform functions of the department shall have
such qualifications as shall be prescribed by the commissioner of citywide
administrative services after consultation with the commissioner; provided
however that, for inspections related to work on medical and natural gas
piping systems, backflow prevention, electrical work and other work as the
department may include through rule, such qualifications shall include:



      (1)   a minimum of five years of acceptable experience working
in the construction industry;



      (2)   a license as a professional engineer or architect issued
pursuant to the education law;



      (3)   a minimum of three years of acceptable experience
working in the construction industry and a minimum of two years of formal
training or education in a field of study relevant to the discipline(s)
inspected;



      (4)   a minimum of two years of acceptable experience working
in the construction industry and completion of an apprentice program, a
minimum of three years in length, in a trade relevant to the discipline(s)
inspected;



      (5)   a minimum of two years of formal training or education
in a field of study relevant to the discipline(s) inspected and completion of
an apprentice program, a minimum of three years in length, in a trade
relevant to the discipline(s) inspected; or



      (6)   equivalent education and experience.



   Further provided however that, for all other inspections, such
qualifications shall include:



      (1)   a minimum of two years of acceptable experience working
in the construction industry;



      (2)   60 credits towards a degree in a field of study relevant
to the discipline(s) inspected;



      (3)   a minimum of one year of acceptable experience working
in the construction industry and a minimum of one year of formal training or
education in a field of study relevant to the discipline(s) inspected;



      (4)   a license or certification in a field of study relevant
to the discipline(s) inspected;



      (5)   completion of an apprentice program, a minimum of two
years in length, in a trade relevant to the discipline(s) inspected; or



      (6)   equivalent education and experience.



   (b)   With respect to buildings and structures, the commissioner
shall have the following powers and duties exclusively, subject to review
only by the board of standards and appeals as provided by law:



      (1)   to examine and approve or disapprove plans for the
construction or alteration of any building or structure, including the
installation or alteration of any service equipment therein, and to direct
the inspection of such building or structure, and the service equipment
therein, in the course of construction, installation or alteration;



      (2)   to require that the construction or alteration of any
building or structure, including the installation or alteration of any
service equipment therein, shall be in accordance with the provisions of law
and the rules, regulations and orders applicable thereto; but where there is
a practical difficulty in the way of carrying out the strict letter of any
provision of law relating to buildings in respect to the use of prescribed
materials, or the installation or alteration of service equipment, or methods
of construction and where equally safe and proper materials or forms of
construction may be employed in a specific case, he may permit the use of
such materials or of such forms of construction, provided that the spirit of
the law shall be observed, safety secured and substantial justice done, but
he shall have no power to allow any variance from the provisions of any law
in any respect except as expressly allowed therein, or from any appellate
ruling of the board of standards and appeals;



      (3)   to issue certificates of occupancy for any building or
structure situated in the city, provided that:



         a.   no building or structure hereafter constructed may
be occupied or used in whole or in part for any purpose until a certificate
of occupancy has been issued;



         b.   no building or structure or part thereof for which
a certificate of occupancy has not been previously issued or required shall
be occupied or used for any purpose whatever in case such building shall
hereafter be altered or converted so as to decrease or increase the number of
living rooms or apartments, until a certificate of occupancy has been issued,
except that this requirement shall not apply to any old law or new law
tenement wherein two or more apartments are combined creating larger
residential units, the total legal number of families within the building is
being decreased, and the bulk of the building is not being increased;



         c.   no buildings hereafter altered or converted from
one class to another class shall be occupied or used for any purpose whatever
in case such building was vacant during the progress of the work, until a
certificate of occupancy has been issued; in case such an alteration does not
necessitate the vacating of the building during the progress of the work, the
occupancy or use of the building shall not continue more than thirty days
after the completion of such alteration, unless a certificate of occupancy
has been issued;



         d.   a certificate of occupancy of a building or
structure shall certify that such building or structure conforms to the
requirements of all laws, rules, regulations and orders applicable to it and
shall be in such form as the commissioner shall direct;



         e.   every certificate of occupancy shall, unless and
until set aside, vacated or modified by the board of standards and appeals or
a court of competent jurisdiction, be and remain binding and conclusive upon
all agencies and officers of the city, and shall be binding and conclusive
upon the department of labor of the state of New York, as to all matters
therein set forth, and no order, direction or requirement affecting or at
variance with any matter set forth in any certificate of occupancy shall be
made or issued by any agency or officer of the city, or by the department of
labor of the state of New York, or any commission, board, officer or member
thereof, unless and until the certificate is set aside, vacated or modified
by the board of standards and appeals or a court of competent jurisdiction
upon the application of the agency, department, commission, officer or member
thereof seeking to make or issue such order, direction or requirement. All
such applications shall be made in writing and filed with the board or court
for hearing thereon; and copies of the application and order, direction or
requirement sought to be made or issued shall be served upon the owner of the
building or structure and upon the commissioner of buildings, if he is not
the applicant, and upon such terms and conditions as to service, notice, time
and place of hearing as the board or court shall direct;



         f.   the commissioner may, on request of the owner of a
building or structure or his authorized representative, issue a temporary
certificate of occupancy for any part of such building or structure provided
that such temporary occupancy or use would not in any way jeopardize life or
property;



         g.   the commissioner may permit in specific cases
experimental or demonstration construction not in compliance with the
building code in order to obtain knowledge and information not supplied from
other experiments within the city; the owner of such construction shall
conduct such periodic tests and evaluations as the commissioner may specify
and submit results and reports to the department of buildings as the
commissioner may require; except as otherwise specifically permitted by the
commissioner, the construction shall be erected and maintained in accordance
with all provisions of applicable laws, rules and regulations.



   (c)   The commissioner may, by instrument in writing filed in the
department, designate a borough superintendent of the department to possess
within a borough any of the powers granted to the commissioner by subdivision
(b) of this section and to exercise the same within such borough in the name
of the commissioner for such times and under such conditions as he may
specify. The borough superintendent shall also perform such other duties as
the commissioner may direct.



   (d)   The commissioner shall review and certify any proposed
subdivision of a zoning lot with any building thereon, in order to ensure
that the subdivision will not result in any violation of the applicable
zoning laws. For such purposes, the subdivision applicant shall file with the
commissioner, prior to recordation with the city register or the county clerk
in the case of Staten Island the following:



      (1)   a subdivision map of the entire original zoning lot with
any building thereon; and



      (2)   a statement by the subdivision applicant assuring
compliance of the proposed subdivision with applicable zoning laws.



(Am. L.L. 2017/219, 12/1/2017)



Section 646. Conduct of investigations.



   The commissioner shall have the power and duty to conduct such
inquiries as may assist him in the performance of the functions of the
department where the public safety is involved and for such purpose he shall
have subpoena power to compel the attendance of witnesses, to administer
oaths, examine witnesses and to compel the production of books, papers and
documents.



Section 647. Definition of "class".



   The term "class" as used in this chapter refers to the classification
of buildings in the building code or other applicable laws and shall be
deemed to refer also to the terms "class" or "kinds" as used in the multiple
dwelling law where such law is applicable.



Section 648. Appeals.



   Appeals may be taken from decisions of the commissioner and of a deputy
commissioner or the borough superintendent acting under a written delegation
of power filed in accordance with the provisions of section six hundred
forty-two or subdivision (c) of section six hundred forty-five of this
chapter, to the board of standards and appeals as provided by law.



Section 649. Inspection.



   The commissioner, any deputy commissioner, borough superintendents,
inspectors, or any officer of the department authorized in writing by the
commissioner or a borough superintendent to act in his borough may, in
accordance with law, for the purpose of performing their respective official
duties, enter and inspect any building, structure, enclosure, premises or any
part thereof or anything therein or attached thereto; and any refusal to
permit such entry or inspection shall be a misdemeanor triable in criminal
court and punishable upon conviction by not more than thirty days
imprisonment or by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars, or both.



Section 650. [Office of the tenant advocate.]



   a.   Establishment of the office of the tenant advocate. There shall
be in the department an office of the tenant advocate, whose duties shall
include, but not be limited to:



      1.   monitoring tenant protection plans to ensure that such
plans comply with the requirements of section 28-104.8.4 of the
administrative code;



      2.   establishing a system to receive comments, questions and
complaints with respect to tenant protection plans, including, but not
limited to, establishing and publicizing the availability of a telephone
number to receive such comments, questions and complaints;



      3.   establishing a system to communicate with tenants who are
affected by work in occupied multiple dwellings to ensure that such tenants
have notice of such work, understand the applicable tenant protection plan
and understand their rights as tenants during such work; and



      4.   monitoring sites with tenant protection plans to ensure
that such sites are complying with such plans and, if the office finds that a
site is not complying with such plan, making a recommendation to the
commissioner to issue a stop work order for such site until such site is in
compliance.



   b.   Reporting. The office of the tenant advocate shall submit to
the mayor and the speaker of the city council, and publish on the
department’s website, quarterly reports related to the responsibilities of
the office, including but not limited to:



      1.   the number of complaints received by the office and a
description of such complaints;



      2.   the average time taken to respond to such complaints;



      3.   a description of efforts made to communicate with
tenants; and



      4.   the number of recommendations made to the commissioner to
issue a stop work order for a site that is not in complying with a tenant
protection plan and the number of such recommendations followed by the
commissioner.



   c.    Posting of office information. The department shall post on
its website the phone number of the office of the tenant advocate and a
statement indicating that any person may contact such office if such person
has a comment, question or complaint regarding tenant protection plans.



(L.L. 2017/161, 8/30/2017, eff. 12/28/2017)



Section 651. Office of building energy and emissions performance.



   a.   There shall be in the department an office of building energy
and emissions performance. The office shall be headed by a director, who is a
registered design professional, who shall be appointed by and shall report to
the commissioner. The duties of the office shall include, but not be limited
to:



      1.   Overseeing implementation of building energy and
emissions performance laws and policies for existing buildings, new
construction and major renovations;



      2.   Establishing or administering protocols for assessing
annual energy use in buildings;



      3.   Monitoring buildings’ energy use and emissions, and
reviewing building emissions assessment methodologies, building emissions
limits, goals and timeframes to further the goal of achieving a 40 percent
reduction in aggregate greenhouse gas emissions from covered buildings by
calendar year 2030, relative to such emissions for the calendar year 2005;



      4.   Creating an online portal for the submission of annual
building emissions assessments by owners;



      5.   Receiving and validating annual building emissions
assessments;



      6.   Auditing building emissions assessments and inspecting
covered buildings, as necessary, to ensure proper reporting;



      7.   Determining recommended penalties, including minimum
penalties, for buildings that are noncompliant with applicable emissions
limits;



      8.   Reviewing applications for alternative methods of
compliance with building emissions limits, including adjustments of emissions
limits, deductions for the purchase of greenhouse gas offsets or renewable
energy credits, deductions for the use of distributed energy resources, and
adjustments for special categories of buildings or for special use and
occupancies;



      9.   Working in close coordination with the mayor’s office
of long-term planning and sustainability; receiving advice and
recommendations, as applicable, from the advisory board established pursuant
to section 28-320.2 of the administrative code; and



      10.   Ensuring the participation and cooperation of agencies,
including but not limited to the department of environmental protection, the
department of housing preservation and development and the department of
citywide administrative services. Such participation and cooperation shall
include, but not be limited to, detailing agency staff to assist office staff
consistent with agency and office functions and reporting to the office on
building energy performance issues and related enforcement efforts.



(L.L. 2019/097, 5/19/2019, eff. 11/15/2019)



Chapter 27: Board of Standards and Appeals



Section 659. Constitution and appointment.



   a.   There shall be an independent board of standards and appeals
located within the office of administrative trials and hearings. The board of
standards and appeals shall consist of five members to be termed
commissioners to be appointed by the mayor each for a term of six years.



   b.   One of the members shall be a planner with professional
qualifications and at least ten years' experience as a planner. One of the
members shall be a registered architect and shall have had at least ten
years' experience as an architect. One of the members shall be a licensed
professional engineer and shall have had at least ten years' experience as an
engineer. The mayor shall designate one of the members, who shall have the
required experience as an architect, planner or as an engineer, to serve as
chair and shall designate one of the members to serve as vice-chair, who
shall act as chair in the absence of the chair or in the event that a vacancy
exists in the office of chair. Of the members, no more than two shall be
residents of any one borough.



   c.   Every member of the board shall receive a salary, which shall
not be reduced during his or her term of office except in case of general
reduction of salaries and in proportion to reductions of salaries of other
officers with similar salaries. A member shall not engage in any other
occupation, profession or employment. Members shall attend the hearings and
executive sessions of the board, and shall perform such other duties as may
be required by the chair.



   d.   Vacancies shall be filled by the mayor for the unexpired term
of the member whose place has become vacant and with a person having his or
her qualifications.



Section 660. Executive director of standards and appeals.



   a.   There shall be an executive director of standards and appeals
who shall be appointed by and shall hold office at the pleasure of the board
of standards and appeals.



   b.   The executive director shall have had at least five years'
experience in administrative or supervisory positions dealing with
administration and personnel. The executive director shall devote his or her
entire time to the performance of his or her duties and shall not engage in
any other occupation, profession or employment.



Section 661. Staff, powers and duties.



   a.   The executive director may appoint such engineers, architects,
and experts and other officers and employees as may be required to perform
the duties of his or her office, with the approval of the board and within
the appropriation provided therefor. The executive director shall also ensure
the board has access to the advice of a state certified general real estate
appraiser, either by engaging the services of an appraiser employed or
retained by a city agency, retaining the services of a third party, or
appointing at least one staff member, provided that such state certified
general real estate appraiser shall have no less than five years' experience
in analyzing and auditing real estate investments, with the approval of the
board and within the appropriation provided therefor.



   b.   The executive director shall assign and supervise all members
of his or her staff. The executive director shall have prepared and presented
matters before the board of standards and appeals in accordance with the
rules, regulations and directives of such board, and shall prepare the
calendar of such board.



(Am. L.L. 2017/102, 5/30/2017, eff. 9/27/2017)



Section 662. Removal by mayor after hearing.



   Any member may be removed by the mayor on proof of official misconduct,
or of negligence in official duties, or of conduct in any manner connected
with his or her official duties which tends to discredit his or her office,
or of mental or physical inability to perform his or her duties; but before
removal he or she shall receive a copy of the charges and shall be entitled
to a hearing before the mayor and to the assistance of counsel at such
hearing.



Section 663. Meetings.



   Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chair and at
such other times as the board may determine. The chair, or in his or her
absence the vice-chair may administer oaths and compel the attendance of
witnesses. All hearings before the board shall be open to the public and
shall be before at least three members of the board, and a concurring vote of
at least three members shall be necessary to a decision to grant an
application or an appeal, to revoke or modify a variance, special permit or
other decision of the board, or to make, amend or repeal a rule or
regulation. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote
of each member upon every question, or if absent or failing to vote,
indicating such fact, and shall also keep records of its examinations and
other official action. Such minutes and such records shall be public records.



Section 665. Rules and regulations; bulletin.



   a.   Every rule or regulation and every amendment or repeal thereof,
and every order, requirement, decision or determination of the board shall
immediately be filed in the office of the board and shall be a public record.



   b.   [Repealed.]



   c.   [Repealed.]



Section 666. Jurisdiction.



   The board shall have power:



      1.   To make, amend and repeal rules and regulations for
carrying into effect the provisions of the laws, resolutions, rules and
regulations in respect to any subject-matter jurisdiction whereof is
conferred by law upon the board, and to include in such rules and regulations
provisions applying to specific conditions and prescribing means and methods
of practice to effectuate such provisions and for carrying into effect the
powers of the board.



      2.   To make, amend and repeal rules and regulations for the
enforcement of those provisions of the labor law and other laws which relate
to the construction or alteration of, structural changes in plumbing and
drainage of, elevators in, fire escapes on, adequacy and means of exit from,
or fire protection in, all buildings within the city, which shall take the
place of the industrial code and of any rules and regulations of the
department of labor of the state of New York relating to the same
subject-matter.



      3.   To make, amend and repeal rules, regulations and
directives governing the preparation and presentation by the director of
matters before the board.



      4.   To exercise exclusively with respect to buildings
situated within the city, the same powers as are exercised by the department
of labor of the state of New York elsewhere in the state.



      5.   To determine and vary the application of the zoning
resolution as may be provided in such resolution and pursuant to section six
hundred sixty-eight.



      6.   To hear and decide appeals from and review,



         (a)   except as otherwise provided by law, any order,
requirement, decision or determination of the commissioner of buildings or of
a deputy commissioner of buildings or any borough superintendent of buildings
acting under a written delegation of power from the commissioner of buildings
filed in accordance with the provisions of section six hundred forty-two or
section six hundred forty-five of this charter, or



         (b)   any order, requirement, decision or determination
of the fire commissioner or any rule or regulation or amendment or repeal
thereof made by the fire commissioner, or



         (c)   any order, requirement, decision or determination
of the commissioner of transportation or the commissioner of ports and trade
made in relation to the structures or uses on water front property under his
or her jurisdiction in connection with the application or enforcement of the
provisions of the zoning resolution of the city of New York, the labor law
and such other laws, rules and regulations as may govern the construction,
alteration, maintenance, use, occupancy, safety, sanitary conditions,
mechanical equipment and inspection of structures in the city, under the
authority conferred upon them by law, by reversing or affirming in whole or
in part, or modifying the order, regulation, decision or determination
appealed from, and to make such order, requirement, decision or determination
as in its opinion ought to be made in the premises, and to that end shall
have the power of the officer from whose ruling the appeal is taken, and of
any officer under whose written delegation of power such ruling was made.



      7.   In passing upon appeals, to vary or modify any rule or
regulation or the provisions of any law relating to the construction, use,
structural changes, equipment, alteration or removal of buildings or
structures, or vaults in sidewalks appurtenant thereto, where there are
practical difficulties or unnecessary hardship in the way of carrying out the
strict letter of the law, so that the spirit of the law shall be observed,
public safety secured and substantial justice done, provided that the
provisions of the housing maintenance code and of any regulation or order
issued under such code may be varied or modified only to the extent permitted
by such code and only in the manner and subject to the conditions therein
specified.



      8.   To review, upon motion of any member of the board, any
rule, regulation, amendment or repeal thereof, and any order, requirement,
decision or determination from which an appeal may be taken to the board
under the provisions of this chapter or of any law, or of any rule,
regulation or decision of the board; but no such review shall prejudice the
rights of any person who has in good faith acted thereon before it is
reversed or modified. The provisions of this chapter relating to appeals to
the board shall be applicable to such review.



      9.   To afford an equal right to the city planning commission,
community boards, and borough boards and lessees and tenants as well as
owners to appear before it for the purpose of proposing arguments or
submitting evidence in respect of any matter brought before it pursuant to
the zoning resolution of the city of New York. In rendering a final
determination on any matter before it in which any such party has proposed
relevant arguments or submitted relevant evidence, the board shall refer to
such arguments or evidence in its final determination and describe the extent
to which the board considered such arguments or evidence in reaching its
final determination, to the extent applicable. The board may categorize
similar comments together and respond to such categories, provided that each
such categorical response indicates the testimony to which it is responding.



      10.   To issue such special permits as the board is authorized
to issue under the zoning resolution.



      11.   To revoke or modify, upon due notice and hearing,
variances and special permits previously granted under the zoning resolution
if the terms and conditions of such grants have been violated.



(Am. L.L. 2017/082, 5/30/2017, eff. 8/28/2017)



Section 667. Inspections.



   Any member of the board or any subordinate thereof shall, when
authorized in writing by the chair, and the director or any officer or
employee designated by the chair in writing shall have power at any time to
enter, inspect and examine any premises, buildings, structures, vehicles or
vessels for the purpose of carrying out the duties of the board and shall
report his or her findings in writing to the board. Refusal to permit such
entry shall be triable by a judge of the New York city criminal court and
punishable by not more than thirty days' imprisonment, or by a fine of not
more than fifty dollars, or both.



Section 668. Variances and special permits.



   a.   The applicant, the property owner, and the preparer of any
document accompanying an application to vary the zoning resolution or an
application for a special permit shall certify, executed under penalty of
perjury, that the statements made in the application and accompanying
documents are correct. Such certifications shall be notarized.



   b.   The board shall establish by rule the minimum required
materials, including but not limited to financial analysis, to be submitted
with an application for a variance from the zoning resolution, provided that
this requirement shall not limit the board’s ability to require additional
materials from an applicant, and further provided that such application shall
include the following:



      1.   In addition to any materials submitted in support of a
claim of uniqueness of physical conditions, a neighborhood character study
defined by a radius appropriate to the scale of the neighborhood, as
determined by the board, shall be provided. Such study shall include data
relevant to the waivers being sought, photographs and relevant land use
approvals, for the entire study area.



      2.   A financial analysis conducted by a qualified real estate
professional, other than the owner or applicant, shall be submitted. Such
financial analysis shall illustrate that an as-of-right project would not
result in a reasonable return on investment whereas the waivers sought for
the project would result in a reasonable return on investment and that the
waivers sought are the minimum necessary to yield a reasonable return. The
financial analysis shall include total development costs comprised of but not
limited to: (i) market-based acquisition costs, (ii) any appraisals of the
property provided by the applicant as part of an application to a local,
state or federal agency within the 5 years prior, and, (iii) as applicable,
hard and soft costs. If the applicant asserts that the project cannot obtain
construction or rehabilitation financing because of the existing zoning
requirements, the applicant shall provide proof of all attempts to obtain
such financing. All construction cost estimates shall be prepared by a
registered architect, professional engineer, builder or contractor, other
than the owner or applicant. Such estimates must be signed and, where
applicable, contain such preparer’s seal. All rental or sellout estimates
must be substantiated by market appraisals with appropriate narrative
adjustments.



   c.   Community boards and borough boards shall review applications
to vary the zoning resolution and applications for special permits within the
jurisdiction of the board of standards and appeals under the zoning
resolution pursuant to the following procedure:



      1.   Each proposal or application shall be filed with the
board of standards and appeals, which shall forward a copy within five days
to the community board for each community district in which the land
involved, or any part thereof, is located, and to the borough board if the
proposal or application involves land located in two or more districts in a
borough.



      2.   Each such community board shall, not later than sixty
days after the receipt of the proposal or application, either notify the
public of the proposal or application, in the manner specified by the city
planning commission pursuant to subdivision i of section one hundred
ninety-seven-c, conduct a public hearing thereon and prepare and submit a
written recommendation thereon directly to the board of standards and
appeals, or waive the conduct of such public hearing and the preparation of
such written recommendation. If a public hearing is held, the applicant shall
submit to the board of standards and appeals a copy of any presentation
materials utilized at the hearing, as well as a notarized statement executed
under penalty of perjury that such materials are true and correct and are as
presented to the community board, and such community board may submit to the
board of standards and appeals a copy of any testimony presented or materials
received from the applicant for such application.



      3.   A copy of a recommendation or waiver by a community board
pursuant to paragraph two of this subdivision that involves land located
within two or more community districts in a borough shall also be filed with
the borough board within the same time period specified in that paragraph.
Not later than thirty days after the filing of such a recommendation or
waiver with the borough board by every community board in which the land
involved is located or after the expiration of the time allowed for such
community boards to act, the borough board may hold a public hearing on the
proposal or application and any such recommendation and may submit a written
recommendation or a waiver thereof to the board of standards and appeals. If
a public hearing is held, the applicant shall submit to the board of
standards and appeals a copy of any presentation materials utilized at the
hearing, as well as a notarized statement executed under penalty of perjury
that such materials are true and correct and are as presented to the borough
board, and such borough board may submit to the board of standards and
appeals a copy of any testimony presented or materials received from the
applicant for such application.



      4.   The receipt of such a recommendation or waiver from every
community or borough board involved, or the expiration of the time allowed
for such boards to act, shall constitute an authorization to the board of
standards and appeals to review the application and to make a decision.



      5.   If after the receipt of such a recommendation or waiver
from every community or borough board involved, or the expiration of the time
allowed for such boards to act, the applicant for a special permit or
variance submits to the board of standards and appeals any additional
documents or plans, he or she shall at the same time forward copies of such
documents or plans to the city planning commission, the council member
involved and to the community or borough board involved.



      6.   Copies of any written information submitted by an
applicant for purposes of determining whether an environmental impact
statement will be required by law in connection with an application under
this section, and any documents or records intended to define or
substantially redefine the overall scope of issues to be addressed in any
such draft environmental impact statement shall be delivered to all affected
community boards and borough boards.



      7.   If a meeting involving a city agency and an applicant is
convened to define or substantially redefine the overall scope of issues to
be addressed in any draft environmental impact statement required by law for
an application subject to review under this section, each community board
involved and each borough president involved shall receive advance notice of
such meeting, and each shall have the right to send one representative to the
meeting.



   d.   The recommendation of a community board or borough board
pursuant to subdivision c of this section shall be filed with the board of
standards and appeals and a copy sent to the city planning commission. The
board of standards and appeals shall conduct a public hearing and act on the
proposed application. All testimony delivered at a public hearing by the
applicant on the proposed application shall be sworn or affirmed under oath.
A decision of the board shall indicate whether each of the specific
requirements of the zoning resolution for the granting of variances has been
met and shall include findings of fact with regard to each such requirement.
When the board of standards and appeals grants or denies an application for a
variance or special permit, the board shall respond, as applicable, to any
relevant recommendation filed with such board by a community board or borough
board regarding such application. Inadvertent failure to comply with the
preceding sentence shall not result in the invalidation of any board decision.



   e.   Copies of a decision of the board of standards and appeals and
copies of any recommendation of the affected community board or borough board
shall be filed with the city planning commission. Copies of the decision
shall also be filed with the affected community or borough boards.



   f.   Any decision of the board of standards and appeals pursuant to
this section may be reviewed as provided by law.



   g.   The board shall report to the department of investigation any
and all information concerning conduct which it knows or should reasonably
know to involve the offering or presentation of a written instrument that
contains a false statement or false information to such board with the
knowledge or belief that such instrument will become part of the records of
such board.



   h.   The city planning commission shall be a party to any proceeding
to determine and vary the application of the zoning resolution. The
commission may appear and be heard on any application pursuant to this
section before the board of standards and appeals if, in the judgment of the
city planning commission, the granting of relief requested in such
application would violate the requirements of the zoning resolution relating
to the granting of variances. The commission shall have standing to challenge
the granting or denial of a variance in a proceeding brought pursuant to
article seventy-eight of the civil practice law and rules, or in any similar
proceeding.



   i.   Any copy of an application or application material that is
required by this chapter, or by rule of the board, to be mailed by the
applicant to a council member, borough president, community board or city
agency shall be sent to such parties by certified mail, or any similar method
approved by the board that provides for proof of service. Proof of service of
the delivery of the initial filing of an application to the council member,
borough president and community board, as required by this chapter, shall be
submitted to the board, and the board shall note on its website that such
proof of service of delivery has been received and verified.



   j.   The board shall provide access on its website to any testimony
posted by the department of city planning pursuant to paragraph 10 of
subdivision a of section 191.



   k.   The board of standards and appeals shall compile data on the
location of all variances and special permit applications filed with the
board after January 1, 1998 and acted upon by the board, into a publicly
available data set. Such data set shall also be provided to the department of
information technology and telecommunications for inclusion on an interactive
map of the city maintained on a city website. Such map shall allow a user to
filter the view of such data by variance, type of special permit, year of
filing of variances and special permits and year of decision by the board on
variances and special permits.



   l.   The board of standards and appeals may promulgate such rules
and prescribe such forms as are necessary to carry out the provisions of this
section.



(Am. L.L. 2017/101, 5/30/2017, eff. 8/28/2017; Am. L.L. 2017/083, 5/30/2017,
eff. 11/26/2017; Am. L.L. 2017/093, 5/30/2017, eff. 11/26/2017; Am. L.L.
2017/103, 5/30/2017, eff. 5/30/2018; Am. L.L. 2017/105, 5/30/2017, eff.
5/30/2018)



Section 669. Procedure on appeals.



   a.   An appeal may be taken by any person aggrieved or by the head
of any agency.



   b.   Such appeal may be taken within such time as shall be
prescribed by the board by general rule, by filing with the officer from whom
the appeal is taken and with the board a notice of appeal, specifying the
grounds thereof. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith
transmit to the board all the papers constituting the record upon which the
action appealed from was taken.



   c.   The board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of
appeals, and give due notice thereof to the parties, and decide the same
within a reasonable time. If the appeal is from an order revoking a permit or
approval, the hearing shall be had no later than at the third scheduled
hearing of the board following the date of filing of the appeal, or five
weeks following such date, whichever is sooner, and the decision of the board
shall be rendered expeditiously. Upon the hearing any party may appear in
person or by agent or attorney.



   d.   Any decision of the board under this section may be reviewed in
accordance with section 25-207 of the administrative code of the city of New
York.



Section 670. False statements.



   a.   It shall be a violation of this section for any person to
knowingly make or allow to be made a material false statement in any
certificate, professional certification, form, signed statement, application
or report that is either submitted directly to the board of standards and
appeals or that is generated with the intent that the board rely on its
assertions.



   b.   The office of the corporation counsel or an agency designated
by the mayor shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of this
section. Pursuant to section 1048, the office of administrative trials and
hearings shall have jurisdiction over any such violation. Any determination
reached by such office shall constitute a final determination.



   c.   A person who has been found to have knowingly made or allowed
to be made a material false statement in violation of subdivision a of this
section shall be subject to a civil penalty of up to $15,000 for each such
false statement. The board of standards and appeals may dismiss any
application in connection with a final determination of such violation.



   d.   Any person who commits a violation of subdivision a of this
section and who notifies the board of such violation prior to receiving
notice of the potential violation shall not be subject to a civil penalty for
such violation, except that the board may dismiss any application in
connection with such violation.



(L.L. 2017/103, 5/30/2017, eff. 5/30/2018)



Chapter 28: Department of Juvenile Justice [Repealed]



 



Chapter 29: Department of Ports and Trade [Repealed]



 



Chapter 30: Department of Youth and Community Development



Section 731. Department; commissioner.



   There shall be a department of youth and community development, the
head of which shall be the commissioner of youth and community development.



Section 732. Deputies.



   The commissioner shall appoint at least one deputy for youth services
who shall be responsible for youth services programs and one deputy for
community services who shall be responsible for community development
programs.



Section 733. Powers and duties.



   a.   The department shall have all the powers and duties of a youth
bureau as prescribed in article nineteen-a of the executive law and the
regulations promulgated thereunder, and shall in addition have the following
powers and duties:



      1.   to advise and assist the mayor and the city council in
developing policies designed to meet the needs of youth;



      2.   to initiate youth programs and coordinate youth programs
and activities sponsored by other city agencies and responsible organizations
in the private sector;



      3.   to plan for and coordinate neighborhood youth services in
conjunction with community boards and youth services planning committees;



      4.   to stimulate community interest in the problems of youth;



      5.   to promote public awareness of resources available for
youth, and to refer the public to appropriate departments, agencies and
organizations for advice, assistance and services available to youth;



      6.   to make such studies and reports regarding needs of youth
as the commissioner, the city council or the mayor may deem appropriate;



      7.   to serve as the central source of information relating to
services and programs available to youth;



      8.   to enter into contracts with individuals, organizations
and institutions as may be necessary to implement policies and programs
consistent with the provisions of this chapter;



      9.   to disburse available city, state and federal funds to
programs throughout the city and, when practical, coordinate such funds with
available funding from the private sector;



      10.   to maintain, operate and control such programs and
facilities as may be necessary or required for the proper administration of
the department; and



      11.   to promulgate rules for the operation of facilities,
services and programs under the department's jurisdiction.



   b.   The department shall have all the powers and duties of a
designated community action agency for the community services block grant
program established pursuant to chapter 106 of title 42 of the United States
code (the "omnibus budget reconciliation act of 1981"; 42 U.S.C. §§
9901-9912), and any amendments thereto.



   c.   The department shall be authorized to carry out programs and
activities for eligible youths pursuant to chapter 30 of title 29 of the
United States Code (title 1 of the "workforce investment act of 1998"; 29
U.S.C. §§ 2801-2945), and any amendments thereto.



Section 734. Youth board.



   a.   There shall be in the department a youth board, which shall
serve as a forum for representatives of disciplines directly concerned with
the welfare of youth.



   b.   The youth board shall be representative of the community, and
shall include persons representing the areas of social service, health care,
education, business, industry and labor.



   c.   The youth board shall consist of up to twenty-eight members,
appointed by the mayor, fourteen of whom shall be appointed upon
recommendation of the city council.



   d.   The mayor shall designate one of the members of the youth board
to be chair.



   e.   The members of the youth board shall serve without compensation.



   f.   The youth board shall meet at least quarterly.



Section 735. Interagency coordinating council.



   a.   There shall be an interagency coordinating council established
by the mayor which shall consist of representatives of each city agency
providing services to youth, representatives from the youth board established
pursuant to section seven hundred thirty-four of this chapter and a
representative of the city council who shall be appointed by the speaker of
the city council. The mayor, or his or her designee, shall serve as
chairperson of the interagency coordinating council and shall preside over
all meetings. The commissioner shall serve as director of the interagency
coordinating council.



   b.   The interagency coordinating council shall:



      1.   prepare and include in the report required by paragraph
ten of this subdivision an annual breakdown for the immediately preceding
fiscal year of each member agency's allocations for services to youth and the
number of youth served;



      2.   recommend, in consultation with the office of operations,
means for improving member agencies' delivery, management and supervision of
services to youth;



      3.   recommend means by which the duplication and
fragmentation of service delivery to youth may be reduced and the efficiency,
effectiveness and economy of service delivery may be enhanced;



      4.   consider proposals from member agencies, the city council
and the youth board for the improvement of service delivery to youth;



      5.   recommend to the mayor joint agency projects or programs
which could make more efficient use of existing resources;



      6.   plan and develop a comprehensive information service for
the benefit of youth, their families, service providers and school and
government personnel, which shall include citywide, boroughwide and community
board program directories, hotlines and other such services designed to
facilitate public accessibility to such information;



      7.   conduct an annual comprehensive youth services needs
assessment on a citywide, boroughwide and community district basis;



      8.   formulate an integrated, comprehensive plan for the
delivery of community-based services to youth;



      9.   compile, collect and develop periodically, and make
available, information and data relating to youth and youth services in New
York city; and



      10.   issue an annual report, in October of each year, to the
city council and the mayor summarizing its activity during the previous
fiscal year and detailing recommendations for improving service delivery and
coordination, reducing duplication and fragmentation and facilitating the
more efficient use of existing resources. Such report shall also include an
annual breakdown of member agencies' allocations for services to youth and
the number of youth served as prescribed in paragraph one of this
subdivision, an annual comprehensive youth services needs assessment as
prescribed in paragraph seven of this subdivision, and a two-year proposed
agenda consisting of specific issues that the interagency coordinating
council plans to address during the current and subsequent fiscal years.



   c.   The interagency coordinating council shall meet at least
quarterly and shall hold at least one public hearing annually, at which
public testimony shall be taken.



Section 736. Community action board.



   There shall be in the department a community action board which shall
be constituted so as to assure that it is in compliance with applicable
federal and state requirements.



Chapter 31: Department of Sanitation



Section 751. Department; commissioner.



   There shall be a department of sanitation the head of which shall be
the commissioner of sanitation.



Section 752. Deputies.



   The commissioner may appoint three deputies.



Section 753. Powers and duties of the commissioner.



   a.   Except as otherwise provided by law, the commissioner shall
have charge and control of and be responsible for all those functions and
operations of the city relating to the cleanliness of the streets and the
disposal of waste, including, without limitation, the following:



      (1)   the sweeping, cleaning, sprinkling, flushing, washing
and sanding of the streets;



      (2)   the removal and disposition of ashes, street sweepings,
garbage, refuse, rubbish and waste;



      (3)   the removal of ice and snow from the streets;



      (4)   the removal of encumbrances from the streets and the
storage or disposal of such encumbrances;



      (5)   plans, design, construction, operation, alteration,
repair, maintenance, replacement, enlargement and regulation of the use of
incinerators, landfills and other plants, facilities and equipment necessary
for or useful for performing the functions and exercising the powers and
duties enumerated in this section; and



      (6)   the powers and duties of the commissioner with respect
to the resource recovery task force set forth in subdivision f of section
fourteen hundred and three, of this charter.



   b.   The commissioner may adopt regulations specifying the kind of
ashes, garbage, refuse, rubbish or other material or substance that will be
collected by the city, from whom it will be taken, the manner in which it
shall be arranged or sorted, the time when it will be collected and the place
at which it shall be deposited for collection, and may prescribe civil
penalties for violations thereof.



   c.   Such regulations shall be enforced by order of the
commissioner. Such order shall be addressed to the owner or owners, lessees
or premises affected thereby. It shall not be necessary to designate such
owner or owners, lessees or occupants by name in such order, however, the
premises shall be designated in the address so that the same may be readily
identified. Service of any such order may be made by delivery of a copy
thereof to the owner or any one of several owners, to a lessee or any one of
several lessees, or to any person of suitable age or discretion in charge of
the premises, or if no person be found in charge of the premises, then by
affixing a copy of such order prominently upon the premises. If such order is
not complied with within the time specified therein, the commissioner shall
prosecute the person or corporation liable therefor for the penalty
prescribed by the regulation violated in furtherance of which such order
shall have been issued and served.



   d.   The commissioner may adopt regulations controlling the use of
sidewalks and gutters by abutting owners and occupants for the disposition of
sweepings, garbage, refuse or rubbish, and may provide that the violation
thereof shall be punishable by civil penalty, fine or imprisonment. Such
regulations shall be submitted to the council and when approved by it shall
be published and enforced in like manner as local laws.



Section 754. Duties and obligations of property owner with respect to keeping
vacant lots clean.



   Notwithstanding any provision of law, the owner of any property at such
owner's own cost shall keep any vacant lot or lots on such property in a
clean and sanitary manner and free of debris and other litter. The department
of sanitation shall be responsible for the enforcement of this section and
may issue rules and regulations in furtherance of such authority. In the
event that an owner of property fails to comply with the provisions of this
section, or the rules and regulations of such department, the department may
provide for the cleaning of a vacant lot at the expense of the property owner
in the manner to be provided by local law.



Section 755. Definition.



   When used in this chapter "street" includes street, avenue, road,
alley, lane, highway, parkway, boulevard, concourse, driveway, culvert and
crosswalk, and every class of public road, square and place, except a wharf,
pier, bulkhead or slip by law committed to the custody and control of any
other agency.



Chapter 34: Department of Investigation



Section 801. Department; commissioner.



   There shall be a department of investigation the head of which shall be
the commissioner of investigation. The commissioner shall be a member of the
bar of the state of New York in good standing and shall have had at least
five years of law enforcement experience. The mayor may remove the
commissioner upon filing in the office of the commissioner of citywide
administrative services and serving upon the commissioner of investigation
the reasons therefor and allowing such officer an opportunity of making a
public explanation.



Section 802. Deputies.



   The commissioner may appoint two deputies, either of whom may, subject
to the direction of the commissioner, conduct or preside at any
investigations authorized by this chapter.



Section 803. Powers and duties.



   a.   The commissioner shall make any investigation directed by the
mayor or the council.



   b.   The commissioner is authorized and empowered to make any study
or investigation which in his opinion may be in the best interests of the
city, including but not limited to investigations of the affairs, functions,
accounts, methods, personnel or efficiency of any agency.



   c.   1.   The commissioner shall, on an ongoing basis,
investigate, review, study, audit and make recommendations relating to the
operations, policies, programs and practices, including ongoing partnerships
with other law enforcement agencies, of the new york city police department
with the goal of enhancing the effectiveness of the department, increasing
public safety, protecting civil liberties and civil rights, and increasing
the public's confidence in the police force, thus building stronger
police-community relations.



      2.   Not later than ninety days after the effective date of
the local law that added this subdivision, the commissioner shall report to
the council regarding the identity and qualifications of the individual
responsible for overseeing the implementation of the duties described in
paragraph 1 of this subdivision, the number of personnel assigned to assist
that individual, and the details of the management structure covering them.
Upon removal or replacement of the individual responsible for overseeing the
implementation of the duties described in paragraph 1 of this subdivision,
notification of that removal or replacement, and the identity and
qualifications of the new individual responsible for overseeing the
implementation of the duties described in paragraph 1 of this subdivision,
shall be provided to the council.



      3.   The Mayor, in consultation with the department and the
new york city police department, shall have the discretion to determine how
sensitive information provided to the department in connection with any
investigation, review, study, or audit undertaken pursuant to this section
shall be treated. The Mayor shall provide the Council with any guidelines,
procedures, protocols or similar measures related to the treatment of
sensitive information that he or she puts in place. Sensitive information
shall mean information concerning (a) ongoing civil or criminal
investigations or proceedings; (b) undercover operations; (c) the identity of
confidential sources, including protected witnesses; (d) intelligence or
counterintelligence matters; or (e) other matters the disclosure of which
would constitute a serious threat to national security or to the safety of
the people of the city of New York.



      4.   The executive director of the civilian complaint review
board and the chief of the new york city police department's internal affairs
bureau shall report to the commissioner any problems and deficiencies
relating to the new york city police department's operations, policies,
programs and practices that he or she has reason to believe would adversely
affect the effectiveness of the department, public safety, the exercise of
civil liberties and civil rights, or the public's confidence in the police
force, and that would be relevant to the duties of the commissioner as
described in paragraph 1 of this subdivision.



      5.   No officer or employee of an agency of the city shall
take any adverse personnel action with respect to another officer or employee
in retaliation for his or her making a complaint to, disclosing information
to, or responding to queries from the commissioner pursuant to activities
undertaken under paragraph 1 of this subdivision unless the complaint was
made or the information was disclosed with the knowledge that it was false or
with willful disregard for its truth or falsity. Any officer or employee who
believes he or she has been retaliated against for making such complaint to,
disclosing such information to, or responding to such queries from the
commissioner may report such action to the commissioner as provided for in
subdivision c of section 12-113 of the administrative code.



      6.   The department's website shall provide a link for
individuals to report any problems and deficiencies relating to the new york
city police department's operations, policies, programs and practices.
Individuals making such reports shall not be required to provide personally
identifying information.



   d.   1.   The commissioner shall, immediately upon appointment of
the individual described in paragraph 2 of this subdivision, in addition to
the investigatory work done in the normal course of the commissioner’s
duties, on an ongoing basis, conduct system-wide investigations, reviews,
studies, and audits, and make recommendations regarding system-wide
operations, policies, programs, and practices of the department of
correction, with the goal of improving conditions in city jails, including
but not limited to, reducing violence in departmental facilities, protecting
the safety of departmental employees and inmates, protecting the rights of
inmates, and increasing the public's confidence in the department of
correction. The commissioner may consider, in addition to any other
information the commissioner deems relevant, information regarding civil
actions filed in state or federal court against individual correction
officers or the city regarding the department of correction, notices of claim
received by the comptroller filed against individual correction officers or
the city regarding the department of correction, settlements by the
comptroller of claims filed against individual correction officers or the
city regarding the department of correction, complaints received and
investigations conducted by the board of correction, complaints received and
any investigations regarding such complaints conducted by the department of
correction, complaints received pursuant to section 804, and any criminal
arrests or investigations of individual correction officers known to the
department of investigation in its ongoing review of the department of
correction.



      2.   No later than 90 days after the effective date of the
local law that added this subdivision, the commissioner shall appoint an
individual responsible for implementing the duties described in paragraph 1
of this subdivision and shall report to the council regarding the identity
and qualifications of such individual, the number of personnel assigned or to
be hired to assist such individual as deemed necessary by the commissioner,
and the details of the management structure covering them. In the event such
individual is removed or resigns, the commissioner shall replace such
individual within 90 days of such removal or resignation and shall provide
notification of such replacement, and the identity and qualifications of the
new individual responsible for overseeing the implementation of the duties
described in paragraph 1 of this subdivision.



      3.   No officer or employee of an agency of the city shall
take any adverse personnel action with respect to another officer or employee
in retaliation for such person making a complaint to, disclosing information
to, or responding to queries from the commissioner pursuant to activities
undertaken pursuant to paragraph 1 of this subdivision unless the complaint
was made or the information was disclosed with the knowledge that it was
false or with willful disregard for its truth or falsity. Any officer or
employee who believes he or she has been retaliated against in violation of
this subdivision may report such action to the commissioner as provided for
in subdivision c of section 12-113 of the administrative code.



      4.   The department's website will provide a link for
individuals to report any problems and deficiencies relating to the
department of correction’s operations, policies, programs and practices.
Individuals making such reports will not be required to provide personally
identifying information.



   e.   1.   For any investigation made pursuant to subdivision a or
b of this section, the commissioner shall prepare a written report or
statement of findings and shall forward a copy of such report or statement to
the requesting party, if any. In the event that any matter investigated,
reviewed, studied, or audited pursuant to this section involves or may
involve allegations of criminal conduct, the commissioner, upon completion of
the investigation, review, study, or audit, shall also forward a copy of his
or her written report or statement of findings to the appropriate prosecuting
attorney, or, in the event the matter investigated, reviewed, studied, or
audited involves or may involve a conflict of interest or unethical conduct,
to the conflicts of interest board.



      2.   For any investigation, review, study, or audit made
pursuant to paragraph 1 of subdivision c or any investigation, review, study,
or audit undertaken to examine system-wide operations, policies, programs,
and practices made pursuant to paragraph 1 of subdivision d of this section,
the commissioner shall prepare a written report or statement of findings and,
upon completion, shall forward a copy of such report or statement to the
mayor, the council, and either the commissioner of correction or the police
commissioner, as applicable. Within 90 days of receiving such report or
statement, the police commissioner or commissioner of correction, as
applicable, shall provide a written response to the commissioner, the mayor,
and the council. Each such written report or statement, along with a summary
of its findings, as well as the reports described in paragraph 3 of this
subdivision, shall be posted on the department's website in a format that is
searchable and downloadable and that facilitates printing no later than 10
days after it is delivered to the mayor, the council, and either the
department of correction or the police department, as applicable. The
commissioner may redact such report or statement as necessary to preserve
safety and security in the facilities under the control of the department of
correction. All such reports, statements, and summaries so posted on the
department's website shall be made easily accessible from a direct link on
the homepage of the website of the department.



      3.   In addition to the reports and statements of findings to
be delivered to the mayor, the council, the commissioner of correction, and
the police commissioner pursuant to paragraph 2 of this subdivision, there
shall be an annual summary report on the activities undertaken pursuant to
paragraph 1 of subdivision c and paragraph 1 of subdivision d of this section
containing the following information: (a) a description of all significant
findings from the investigations, reviews, studies, and audits conducted in
the preceding year; (b) a description of the recommendations for corrective
action made in the preceding year; (c) an identification of each
recommendation described in previous annual reports on which corrective
action has not been implemented or completed; and (d) the number of open
investigations, reviews, studies, or audits that have been open, as of the
close of the preceding calendar year, for a time period of (1) six months up
to and including one year, (2) more than one year up to and including two
years, (3) more than two years up to and including three years, and (4) more
than three years. The annual summary report required by this paragraph
relating to the police department shall be completed and delivered to the
mayor, the council, and the police commissioner on April 1, 2015 and every
April 1 thereafter. The annual summary required by this paragraph relating to
the department of correction shall be completed and delivered to the mayor,
the council, and the commissioner of correction on April 1 beginning in 2018.



   f.   The jurisdiction of the commissioner shall extend to any
agency, officer, or employee of the city, or any person or entity doing
business with the city, or any person or entity who is paid or receives money
from or through the city or any agency of the city.



   g.   The commissioner shall forward to the council and to the mayor
a copy of all reports and standards prepared by the corruption prevention and
management review bureau, upon issuance by the commissioner.



(Am. L.L. 2016/165, 12/6/2016, eff. 2/4/2017)



Section 804. Complaint bureau.



   There shall be a complaint bureau in the department which shall receive
complaints from the public, including, but not limited to, complaints about
any problems and deficiencies relating to the New York city police
department's or department of correction’s operations, policies, programs
and practices.



(Am. L.L. 2016/165, 12/6/2016, eff. 2/4/2017)



Section 805. Conduct of investigations.



   a.   For the purpose of ascertaining facts in connection with any
study or investigation authorized by this chapter, the commissioner and each
deputy shall have full power to compel the attendance of witnesses, to
administer oaths and to examine such persons as he may deem necessary.



   b.   The commissioner or any agent or employee of the department
duly designated in writing by him for such purposes may administer oaths or
affirmations, examine witnesses in public or private hearing, receive
evidence and preside at or conduct any such study or investigation.



Section 806. Interference with investigation.



Editor's note: became Section 1128.



Section 807. Inspectors general of agencies.



   No person shall be appointed as an inspector general of a city agency
unless such appointment is approved by the commissioner of investigation. The
commissioner of investigation shall promulgate standards of conduct and shall
monitor and evaluate the activities of inspectors general in the agencies to
assure uniformity of activity by them.



Section 808. Evaluation and recommendations.*



* Editor's note: there are two sections designated as Section 808.



   a.   For the purposes of this section, the following terms have the
following meanings:



      “Actions, claims, complaints, and investigations” means
information regarding civil actions reported pursuant to section 7-114 of the
administrative code; notices of claim filed against the police department or
individual police officers, or both, received by the comptroller; settlements
of claims filed against the police department or individual police officers,
or both, by the comptroller; complaints received and investigations conducted
by the civilian complaint review board; closed investigations conducted by
the police department; reviews of police department investigations conducted
by the commission to combat police corruption; complaints received pursuant
to section 804; any criminal arrests or closed investigations of individual
police officers known to the police department for actions taken while on
duty; and claims of bias-based profiling established pursuant to section
14-151 of the code.



      “Inspector general for the police department” means the
individual responsible for implementing the duties set forth in paragraph 1
of subdivision c of section 803.



   b.   The inspector general for the police department shall, working
with the law department, the comptroller, the police department, the civilian
complaint review board, the commission to combat police corruption, and the
commission on human rights collect and evaluate information regarding
allegations or findings of improper police conduct and develop
recommendations relating to the discipline, training, and monitoring of
police officers and related operations, policies, programs, and practices of
the police department, including, but not limited to, any system that is used
by the police department to identify police officers who may be in need of
enhanced training or monitoring. In developing such recommendations, the
inspector general for the police department shall consider, at a minimum, the
following information:



      1.   patterns or trends identified by analyzing actions,
claims, complaints, and investigations, including, but not limited to, any
patterns or trends regarding precincts and commands;



      2.   comparisons of closed actions reported pursuant to
section 7-114 of the administrative code with information concerning any
incidents alleged to have given rise to such civil actions contained in other
closed actions, claims, complaints, and investigations, as applicable;



      3.   steps taken by the police department in response to
actions, claims, complaints, and investigations, including investigations
conducted, disciplinary actions, or changes in its operations, policies,
programs, and practices;



      4.    any recommendations issued by the comptroller, the
civilian complaint review board, the commission to combat police corruption,
and the commission on human rights related to actions, claims, complaints,
and investigations, including, but not limited to, recommendations regarding
reporting on civil actions required pursuant to section 7-114 of the
administrative code;



      5.    a review of criteria included in any system that is used
by the police department to identify police officers who may be in need of
enhanced training or monitoring and outcomes resulting from utilization of
such system; and



      6.   information on collaboration and information sharing
procedures of the police department with the law department, the comptroller,
the civilian complaint review board, the commission to combat police
corruption, and the commission on human rights.



   c.   Any written evaluations or recommendations developed by the
inspector general for the police department pursuant to subdivision b of this
section shall be made available on the website of such individual’s office
by April 30, 2018 and annually thereafter until May 1, 2020, after which such
recommendations shall be issued every three years.



   d.   Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the
authority of either the police commissioner or the commissioner of
investigation.



   e.    All information collected, reviewed, or included in the
evaluations or recommendations issued pursuant to this section shall be
subject to the protections set forth in paragraph 3 of subdivision c of
section 803.



   f.   Nothing in this section shall be construed to require the
police department to provide any information or documents pertaining to an
ongoing criminal, civil, or administrative investigation or proceeding, or to
disclose information regarding an individual that has requested their
identity remain confidential following a report to the department of improper
police conduct by another department officer or employee, concerning such
officer or employee’s office or employment, except as required by law.



   g.   This section shall be construed in accordance with all
applicable laws, including, but not limited to, section 50-a of the civil
rights law.



(L.L. 2017/166, 9/8/2017)



Section 808. Public outreach and reporting.*



* Editor's note: there are two sections designated as Section 808.



   (a)   The department shall conduct annual outreach campaigns to
educate the public on forms of government corruption, fraud, and waste, and
provide information regarding how the public can submit complaints to the
department. Such outreach campaigns are not limited to but whenever
practicable shall include the use of print, radio, and public forums.



   (b)   The department shall post a report on its website by March 1st
of each year regarding public complaints received by the department for the
preceding year. Such reports shall include the total number of complaints
disaggregated by the mechanism through which the complaint was submitted and
a summary of relevant outreach activities.



(L.L. 2018/043, 1/11/2018, eff. 5/11/2018)



Chapter 35: Department of Citywide Administrative Services



Section 810. Department, commissioner.



   There shall be a department of citywide administrative services, the
head of which shall be the commissioner of citywide administrative services.
The commissioner may appoint deputies within available appropriations.



Section 811. Powers and duties of the commissioner; general.



   The commissioner shall be responsible for citywide personnel matters,
as set forth in this chapter, and shall have all the powers and duties of a
municipal civil service commission provided in the civil service law or in
any other statute or local law other than such powers and duties as are by
this chapter assigned to the mayor, the city civil service commission or the
heads of the city agencies; the commissioner shall in addition have the power
to perform all the functions and operations of the city of New York relating
to the maintenance and care of public buildings and facilities; the
procurement of goods and other personal property; the disposition of surplus
property; the provision to city agencies of services other than personal
services; the acquisition, disposition and management by the city of real
property other than housing; and the provision of automotive, communication,
energy, and data processing services.



Section 812. Personnel management, declaration of intent.



   a.   The personnel policies and practices of the city government, in
furtherance of this charter, the civil service law and rules and other
applicable law, shall: (1) preserve and promote merit and fitness in city
employment, (2) ensure that appointments and promotions in city service are
made, and that wages are set, without regard to political affiliation, and
without unlawful discrimination based on sex, race, color, religion,
religious observance, national origin, disability, age, marital status,
citizenship status or sexual orientation; and promote and support the
efficient and effective delivery of services to the public.



   b.   Consistent with subdivision a of this section, the heads of
city agencies shall have such powers, duties and responsibilities for
personnel management as they shall require to administer their agencies
effectively and to supervise, evaluate, motivate, discipline, provide
incentives for and improve the skills of employees of the city.



Section 813. City civil service commission.



   a.   There shall be a city civil service commission, consisting of
five members, not more than three of whom shall be members of the same
political party. Members shall be appointed by the mayor, from a list of
nominations provided by the screening committee established pursuant to
subdivision b of this section, for overlapping terms of six years. Of the
members first appointed, two shall serve for two years and two for four years
and one for six years. The members shall be removable in the manner provided
for members of a municipal civil service commission in the civil service law.
A vacancy in such commission shall be filled in the same manner as regular
appointments for the balance of the unexpired term. The mayor shall designate
a member as chair and vice chair, respectively, for one-year terms. Within
appropriations for such purposes, the members of the commission shall be
reimbursed on a per diem basis for attendance at regularly scheduled meetings
and hearings of the commission.



   b.   There shall be a screening committee which shall submit to the
mayor a list of nominees, which shall include persons with knowledge or
experience of the civil service system, or personnel management, or
compensation practices, from which the mayor shall make appointments to the
city civil service commission. Such screening committee shall consist of six
members, of whom four shall be appointed by the mayor and two shall be
appointed by the municipal labor committee. The screening committee shall
submit the list of nominees upon the occurrence of any vacancy on the
commission or at least three months prior to the expiration of the term of
any incumbent member.



   c.   The commission shall appoint a counsel, who shall not be
employed or retained by any other city agency, and may appoint a secretary
and such other subordinates as may be necessary within the appropriation
therefor.



   d.   The civil service commission shall have the power to hear and
determine appeals by any person aggrieved by any action or determination of
the commissioner made pursuant to paragraphs three, four, five, six, seven
and eight of subdivision a or paragraph five of subdivision b of section
eight hundred fourteen of this chapter and may affirm, modify, or reverse
such action or determination. Any such appeal shall be taken by application
in writing to the commission within thirty days after the action or
determination appealed from. The commission shall also have the powers and
responsibilities of a municipal civil service commission under section
seventy-six of the state civil service law. In accordance with the
requirements of chapter forty-five, the commission shall promulgate rules of
procedure, including rules establishing time schedules, for the hearings and
determinations authorized by this section.



   e.   The commission, on its own initiative, or upon request of the
mayor, council, or commissioner, shall have the power and duty to conduct
reviews, studies, or analyses of the administration of personnel in the city,
including the classification of titles by the commissioner.



   f.   The commission shall prepare and transmit directly to the mayor
departmental estimates as required by section two hundred thirty-one. The
mayor shall include such proposed appropriations for the commission as a
separate agency in the preliminary and executive budgets as are sufficient
for the commission to fulfill the obligations assigned to it by this charter
or other law.



Section 814. Personnel management; powers and duties of the commissioner.



   a.   The commissioner shall have the following powers and duties in
addition to the powers and duties of a municipal civil service commission
provided in the civil service law, and those vested in the commissioner as
head of the department, except where any specific power or duty is assigned
to the mayor, heads of city agencies or the civil service commission pursuant
to this chapter:



      (1)   To recruit personnel;



      (2)   To make studies in regard to the grading and classifying
of positions in the civil service, establish criteria and guidelines for
allocating positions to an existing class of positions, and grade and
establish classes of positions;



      (3)   To schedule and conduct examinations for positions in
the civil service;



      (4)   To establish, promulgate and certify eligible lists in
the manner provided in the civil service law, and the rules of the
commissioner;



      (5)   To determine the appropriateness of eligible lists for
the filing of vacancies in the manner provided in the civil service law and
the rules of the commissioner;



      (6)   To investigate applicants for positions in the civil
service; to review their qualifications, and to revoke or rescind any
certification or appointment by reason of the disqualification of the
applicant or appointee under the provisions of the civil service law, and the
rules of the commissioner or any other law;



      (7)   To review any appointment of persons as provisional
employees within sixty days after appointment to assure compliance with this
chapter, the civil service law, and any rule or regulation issued pursuant to
this charter or civil service law;



      (8)   To certify payrolls in accordance with the provisions of
the civil service law and the rules of the commissioner;



      (9)   To keep records regarding candidates for appointment to
the civil service and officers and employees in the civil service;



      (10)   To develop and recommend to the mayor standard rules
governing working conditions, vacations and leaves of absence; and career,
salary and wage plans providing for the creation, abolition and modification
of positions and grades and fixing salaries of persons paid from the city
treasury, subject to the provisions of this charter, the civil service law,
other applicable statutes and collective bargaining agreements;



      (11)   To administer the city-wide safety incentive, training
and development, and other such personnel programs of the city.



   b.   The commissioner shall have the following powers and duties
with respect to the personnel management functions assigned to city agencies
pursuant to subdivisions a, b, c, and d of section eight hundred fifteen.



      (1)   To aid in the development of effective and efficient
personnel programs and professional personnel staffs in the agencies of the
city; and to convene the personnel officers of the agencies from time to time
as a personnel council to consider personnel matters of inter-agency or of
city-wide concern;



      (2)   To approve agency plans and programs pursuant to
paragraphs seven, nine and thirteen of subdivision a of section eight hundred
fifteen;



      (3)   To establish and enforce standards, guidelines and
criteria for the personnel management functions assigned to the agencies and
to audit performance by the agencies of such personnel functions;



      (4)   To reverse or rescind any agency personnel action or
decision pursuant to an assignment or delegation of authority in this
chapter, upon a finding of abuse after notification to the agency and an
opportunity to be heard;



      (5)   To hear and determine appeals by any person aggrieved by
any action or determination of the head of an agency made pursuant to
paragraphs three, five, seven and eleven of subdivision a of section eight
hundred fifteen, subject to review by the civil service commission as
provided in subdivision c of section eight hundred thirteen;



      (6)   To delegate to the head of an agency personnel
management functions assigned to the commissioner where such delegation is
not otherwise prohibited by the civil service law, and pursuant to terms and
conditions prescribed by the commissioner;



      (7)   To administer personnel programs of a city-wide nature
or common to two or more departments where administration by separate
agencies would be impracticable and uneconomical.



   c.   The commissioner shall promulgate rules and regulations
relating to the personnel policies, programs and activities of city
government in furtherance of and consistent with the state civil service law
and this chapter. The commissioner shall transmit to the state civil service
commission each proposed rule which must be submitted to such commission,
including any which establishes or reclassifies titles in the non-competitive
or exempt class, within sixty days after the public hearing has been held on
such rule.



   d.   The commissioner shall, at the time requested by the city civil
service commission or the equal employment practices commission, provide each
commission with all the information which such commission deems necessary to
fulfill the duties assigned to it by the charter. The provisions of this
subdivision shall not apply to any information which is required by law to be
kept confidential or which is protected by the privileges for attorney-client
communications, attorney work products, or material prepared for litigation.



   e.   The commissioner shall submit a quarterly report to the mayor,
the council, the civil service commission and the equal employment practices
commission. Such report shall specify, by agency and by title, including
temporary titles:



      (1)   the number of provisional employees at the end of the
second month of the quarter;



      (2)   the length of time such provisional employees have
served in their positions; and



      (3)   the actions taken by the city to reduce the number of
such provisional employees and the length of their service in such positions.
Such reports shall be submitted by the last day of March, June, September,
and December of each year.



(Am. L.L. 2019/012, 1/11/2019, eff. 5/11/2019)



Section 814.1. Office of diversity and inclusion.



   a.   Definitions.



      Chief. The term “chief” means the director of the office of
diversity and inclusion.



      Office. The term “office” means the office of diversity and
inclusion.



   b.   The commissioner shall establish an office of diversity and
inclusion. Such office shall be headed by a chief who shall be appointed by
the commissioner.



   c.   Powers and duties. The commissioner, acting through the office,
shall have the power to:



      (1)   Compile and report on statistics relating to hiring,
salary, and promotion for all city agencies disaggregated by race, gender,
civil service classification, and other categories as appropriate, and make
such reports publicly available online on an annual basis.



      (2)   Establish and enforce uniform procedures and standards
to be utilized by city agencies in establishing measures, programs and plans
to ensure a fair and effective affirmative employment plan for equal
employment opportunities for minority group members and women who are
employed by, or who seek employment with, city agencies. Such procedures
shall include a time schedule for the development of such plans which
provides for the preparation by each agency of a draft plan, the review of
such draft plan by the department of citywide administrative services, the
equal employment practices commission, and such other agency as the mayor
requires, and the consideration by the agency of any comments received on
such draft plans prior to the adoption of a final plan as required by
paragraph nineteen of subdivision a of section eight hundred fifteen;



      (3)   Establish a uniform format to be utilized by all city
agencies in the preparation of the quarterly reports required by subdivision
i of section eight hundred fifteen. Such format shall provide for the
presentation of statistical information regarding total employment, including
provisional, seasonal, per-diem and part-time employees, new hiring and
promotions in a manner that facilitates understanding of an agency’s
efforts to provide fair and effective equal opportunity employment for
minority group members, women and members of other groups who are employed
by, or who seek employment with, city agencies;



      (4)   Ensure accountability by evaluating each city agency in
accordance with the procedures and standards set by the office pursuant to
paragraph 1 of this subdivision. The office shall ensure that each evaluation
shall include, but not be limited to, the following: (i) a determination for
each city agency of whether such agency is compliant with such procedures and
standards; (ii) an analysis of whether and how such procedures and standards
should be expanded or modified for the next annual reporting period, with a
view towards improving upon prior benchmarks; and (iii) any other information
the office deems relevant. The evaluations shall be compiled and included in
the annual report to the mayor, the city council, the equal employment
practices commission and the city civil service commission pursuant to
paragraph 8 of this subdivision. Such report shall be made publicly available
on the city’s website.



      (5)   Develop, in conjunction with other city agencies, a
clearinghouse for information on employment and educational programs and
services for minority group members and women; and



      (6)   Provide assistance to minority group members and women
employed by, or interested in being employed by, city agencies to ensure that
such minority group members and women benefit, to the maximum extent
possible, from city employment and educational assistance programs.



      (7)   Develop policies and best practices to ensure that
adequate support, training and mentorship is made available to
underrepresented city employees to assist with career advancement in the
civil service.



      (8)   Develop recruitment, hiring, and career advancement
procedures that address unconscious biases and systemic barriers to achieve
greater diversity in the recruitment and career advancement of city
employees, and provide trainings for city agency employees responsible for
recruitment, discretionary hiring, and career advancement.



      (9)   No later than September 30, 2020, and no later than
September 30 annually thereafter, publish and submit to the mayor, council
and the commission on equal employment practices a report on the activities
of the department of citywide administrative services and city agencies to
provide fair and effective affirmative employment practices to ensure equal
employment opportunity for minority group members and women who are employed
by, or who seek employment with, city agencies. Such report shall include,
but not be limited to, an analysis of the city government workforce and
applicants for such employment by agency, title and classification except
where a civil service exam was the basis of appointment; statistics relating
to hiring, salary and promotion for all city agencies disaggregated by race,
gender, and civil service classification and other categories as appropriate;
a description of each agency’s employment practices, policies and programs;
an analysis of the effectiveness of the city’s efforts to provide fair and
effective affirmative employment practices to ensure equal employment
opportunity for minority group members and women who are employed by, or who
seek employment with, city agencies; an analysis of employee response rates
to efforts to collect demographic information over time, and whether changes
in the racial and ethnic classification categories used to collect
demographic information have had an impact on employee response rates; a
review of racial and ethnic classification categories used to collect
demographic information and recommendations for how to improve the use of
such categories to reflect the city government workforce; and such
legislative, programmatic and budgetary recommendations for the development,
implementation or improvement of such activities as the commissioner deems
appropriate.



(L.L. 2019/012, 1/11/2019, eff. 5/11/2019; Am. L.L. 2019/014, 1/11/2019, eff.
5/11/2019)



Section 815. Agency heads; powers and duties concerning personnel management.



   a.   Subject to the civil service law and applicable provisions of
this charter, heads of city agencies shall have the following powers and
duties essential for the management of their agencies in addition to powers
and duties vested in them pursuant to this charter or other applicable law:



      (1)   To recruit personnel;



      (2)   To participate with the department of citywide
administrative services in job analyses for the classification of positions;



      (3)   To allocate individual positions to existing civil
service titles;



      (4)   To allocate individual managerial or executive positions
to managerial assignment levels;



      (5)   To assist the department of citywide administrative
services in the determination of minimum qualifications for classes of
positions and to review and evaluate qualifications of candidates for
positions in the civil service;



      (6)   To assist the commissioner in the planning and
preparation of open competitive examinations;



      (7)   To schedule and conduct tests other than written tests
for promotion to competitive class positions;



      (8)   To determine whether to hold an open competitive or
promotion examination to fill positions in the civil service subject to
disapproval of the commissioner within thirty days;



      (9)   To plan and administer employee incentive and
recognition programs;



      (10)   To fill vacant positions within quarterly spending
allotments and personnel controls pursuant to section one hundred six;



      (11)   To administer and certify eligible lists for classes of
positions unique to the agency;



      (12)   To make appointments to competitive positions from
eligible lists pursuant to subsection one of section sixty-one of the state
civil service law, which authority shall not be abridged or modified by local
law or in any other manner;



      (13)   To establish and administer performance evaluation
programs to be used during the probationary period and for promotions,
assignments, incentives and training;



      (14)   To conduct training and development programs to improve
the skills, performance and career opportunities of employees;



      (15)   To ensure and promote equal opportunity for all persons
in appointment, payment of wages, development and advancement;



      (16)   To administer employee safety programs;



      (17)   To maintain personnel records;



      (18)   To perform such other personnel management functions as
are delegated by the commissioner pursuant to this chapter or that are not
otherwise assigned by this chapter;



      (19)   To establish measures and programs to ensure a fair and
effective affirmative employment plan to provide equal employment opportunity
for minority group members and women who are employed by, or who seek
employment with, the agency and, in accordance with the uniform procedures
and standards established by the department of citywide administrative
services for this purpose, to adopt and implement an annual plan to
accomplish this objective. Copies of such plans shall be filed with the
mayor, council, department of citywide administrative services, equal
employment practices commission, and city civil service commission and shall
be made available for reasonable public inspection. In carrying out duties
related to this paragraph, the heads of city agencies shall cooperate fully
with the department of citywide administrative services’ office of
diversity and inclusion in accordance with section 814.1; and



      (20)   To provide assistance to minority group members and
women interested in being employed by city agencies to ensure that such
minority group members and women benefit, to the maximum extent possible,
from city employment and educational assistance programs.



   b.   Within one year from the effective date of this chapter, the
head of each agency shall prepare and submit to the mayor and the
commissioner a plan and schedule for the discharge of the powers and duties
assigned in this section. No such plan shall take effect until approved by
the mayor.



   c.   The mayor may modify, suspend, or withdraw for cause any power
or duty assigned or delegated to the head of an agency pursuant to paragraphs
three, four, seven, eight, and eleven of subdivision a of this section.



   d.   Notification prior to each action or decision of an agency
pursuant to this chapter which changes the status of an individual employee,
a position, or a class of positions shall be provided to the commissioner.
The head of each agency shall certify on each payroll that all personnel
actions and transactions of the agency conform with the provisions of the
civil service law and this chapter, the rules of the commissioner and other
applicable law.



   e.   Before any new position in the city service shall be created,
the agency head shall furnish the commissioner of finance with a certificate
stating the title of the class of positions to which the position is to be
allocated. If the position is to be allocated to a new class of positions,
the agency head shall request of the commissioner, and the commissioner shall
furnish to the agency head and the commissioner of finance, a certificate
stating the appropriate civil service title for the proposed position, the
range of salary of comparable civil service positions and a statement of the
class specifications and line of promotion into which such new position will
be placed and any such new position shall be created only with the title
approved by the commissioner,



   f.   The heads of all agencies shall, except as otherwise provided
by law, have power to appoint and remove, subject to the provisions of the
civil service law, all chiefs of bureaus and all other officers, employees
and subordinates in their respective administrations, departments or offices,
without reference to the tenure of office of any appointee and to assign them
their duties. Nothing herein shall be construed to preclude the mayor from
entering into a collective bargaining agreement which provides for a
procedure governing the discipline of employees, including their removal,
pursuant to section 12-312 of the administrative code of the city of New York
for employees of agencies the heads of which are appointed by the mayor.



   g.   The heads of city agencies or their designated representatives
shall fulfill the requirements for agency participation in matters affecting
the management of the agency in advance of collective bargaining negotiations
affecting employees of any agency contained in section eleven hundred
seventy-seven.



   h.   The head of each city agency shall ensure that such agency does
not discriminate against employees or applicants for employment as prohibited
by federal, state and local law.



   i.   The head of each city agency shall quarterly publish and submit
to the mayor, council, department of citywide administrative services, and
the equal employment practices commission a report on the agency's efforts
during the previous quarter to implement the plan adopted pursuant to
paragraph nineteen of subdivision a of section eight hundred fifteen.



   j.   The head of each city agency shall include in all employment
retention, recruitment, training and promotional program literature,
advertisements, solicitations and job applications, such language as may be
necessary to effectuate the purpose of this chapter.



   k.   The head of each city agency shall require each employment
agency, or authorized representative of workers with which it has a
collective bargaining or other agreement or understanding and which is
involved in the performance of recruitment and retention with the agency to
furnish a written statement that such employment agency, labor union or
representative shall not discriminate against employees or applicants for
employment pursuant to federal, state or local law and that such union or
representative will cooperate in the implementation of the agency's
obligations pursuant to this chapter.



(Am. L.L. 2019/012, 1/11/2019, eff. 5/11/2019)



Section 815.1. Anti-sexual harassment training.



   a.   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms
have the following meanings:



      Agency. The term “agency” has the same meaning as such term
is defined in section 1150 and shall include the offices of the borough
presidents, the comptroller and the public advocate.



      Interactive training. The term “interactive training” means
participatory teaching whereby the trainee is engaged in a trainer-trainee
interaction, use of audio-visuals, computer or online training program or
other participatory demonstrations as determined by the department. However,
such “interactive training” is not required to be live or facilitated by
an in-person instructor in order to satisfy the provisions of this
subdivision.



   b.   All personnel. The head of each agency, in consultation with
the department, shall ensure that each employee of such agency receives
anti-sexual harassment interactive training annually. Such training shall be
designed to create an environment that is free from sexual harassment, to
discourage the development of sexual harassment, to raise awareness and
sensitivity of employees to potential sexual harassment and to enable
employees to prevent and respond to sexual harassment. Such training shall
include the specific responsibilities of supervisory and managerial employees
in the prevention of sexual harassment and retaliation, and measures that
such employees may take to appropriately address sexual harassment
complaints. Such training may be included as a part of a broader
anti-discrimination training and shall include but not be limited to the
following:



      1.   An explanation of sexual harassment as a form of unlawful
discrimination under local law;



      2.   A statement that sexual harassment is a form of unlawful
discrimination under federal and state law;



      3.   A description of what sexual harassment is;



      4.   The internal complaint process available to employees
within such agency;



      5.   The complaint process available through the commission on
human rights, the division of human rights and the United States equal
employment opportunity commission, including contact information;



      6.   The prohibition of retaliation, pursuant to federal,
state and local law and the internal complaint process, and examples thereof;
and



      7.   Information concerning bystander intervention, including
but not limited to any resources that explain how to engage in bystander
intervention.



   c.   For purposes of this section the term “employee” shall
apply to interns.



   d.   Compliance.



      1.   The department of citywide administrative services shall
maintain a record of all trainings required pursuant to this section for at
least three years. On or before January 31 of each year the department of
citywide administrative services shall report to the mayor and the speaker
the results of agency compliance with the requirements of this section.



      2.   The training required pursuant to this section is
intended to establish a minimum threshold and does not prohibit any agency
from providing more frequent or additional anti-sexual harassment training.



(L.L. 2018/092, 5/9/2018, eff. 9/6/2018; Am. L.L. 2018/108, 5/26/2018, eff.
9/6/2018)



Section 816. Management service.



   a.   The commissioner, in consultation with the heads of agencies,
shall develop and submit to the mayor a city-wide plan and schedule for the
development of qualified and competent technical, professional, management,
administrative, and supervisory personnel in the civil service to meet the
managerial needs of city government. The mayor shall approve, disapprove or
modify the plan within one year after the effective date of this chapter.



   b.   The city-wide plan shall establish a management service for
city agencies and shall provide for:



      (1)   Membership in the service of employees with significant
policy, administrative, supervisory, managerial or professional duties that
require the exercise of independent judgment in the scheduling and assignment
of work, program management or planning, evaluation of performance or
allocation of resources; and including the ranking officials assigned to the
local service districts of agencies within community districts and boroughs;



      (2)   Opportunities for entry into the service by qualified
civil servants and qualified persons not employed by the city consistent with
requirements of the civil service law;



      (3)   A city-wide qualifying test for entry into the service;



      (4)   Assessments of capacity and potential to perform
managerial duties as part of competitive tests for entry into the service and
assignments within the service;



      (5)   A single managerial class of positions for each
occupational series within the service with assignment levels within each
such class;



      (6)   A plan for achieving equitable pay scales for members of
the service consonant with their duties and responsibilities;



      (7)   Merit increases, incentive awards, and recognition
programs for members of the service;



      (8)   Performance evaluations for members of the service to be
used for assignments, incentive awards, probationary period review, and
disciplinary action;



      (9)   A probationary period not to exceed one year for members
of the service;



      (10)   Management intern programs, and,



      (11)   Training and career development programs.



   c.   The commissioner shall conduct city-wide programs and functions
related to the management service; assist agencies in the implementation of
the management service plan; and review and evaluate agency performance under
the plan.



Section 817. Appointments and promotions.



   a.   All appointments, promotions and changes in status of persons
in the public service of the city shall be made in the manner prescribed by
the constitution of the state and in accordance with the provisions of the
civil service law and other provisions of law not inconsistent therewith nor
with this charter.



   b.   Whenever qualifications for the appointment of persons to
public office are prescribed by law, the appointing officer shall, upon
making such appointment, file with the civil service commission a certificate
that such appointment complies with such law.



Section 818. Power of investigation.



   The commissioner shall have the power to make investigations concerning
all matters touching the enforcement and effect of the provisions of the
civil service law insofar as it applies to the city and the rules and
regulations prescribed thereunder, or concerning the actions of any examiner
or subordinate of the department, or of any officer or employee of the city
or of any county within the city, in respect to the execution of the civil
service law; and in the course of such investigations the commissioner shall
have the power to administer oaths, to compel the attendance of witnesses,
and to examine such persons as deemed necessary.



Section 819. No compensation to unauthorized employee.



   No officer of the city whose duty is to sign or countersign warrants
shall draw, sign or issue, or authorize the drawing, signing or issuing of
any warrant on the commissioner of finance or other disbursing officer of the
city for payment of salary to any person in its service whose appointment or
retention has not been in accordance with the civil service law and the valid
rules in force thereunder.



Section 820. Examination for licenses.



   The commissioner shall, unless otherwise provided by law, have power,
upon request of any person charged with the duty of issuing licenses or
permits, to conduct, under rules and regulations to be established by the
commissioner, examinations and tests to determine the qualifications of
persons applying for such licenses or permits. The commissioner shall certify
to the person having power to issue the license or permit the result of any
such examination or test.



Section 821. Officers or employees designated to serve in exempt civil
service positions.



   a.   Notwithstanding any provision in this charter to the contrary,
the mayor or head of an agency may designate any officer or employee
occupying a position in the competitive class of the civil service to serve
in a position in the exempt class, and in such case, the officer or employee
so designated shall thereupon enter upon and exercise all the powers and
duties and receive the salary of such exempt position, and shall retain all
the rights, privileges and status of such officer or employee's position in
the competitive class.



   b.   The appointment of any person chosen to fill the position thus
left vacant shall be temporary and shall terminate upon the return of such
officer or employee to such position as provided in subdivision e of this
section.



   c.   Such designation shall be in writing and shall be filed and
remain of record in the office of such agency, in the office of the
commissioner and in the office of the mayor and shall remain in force until
revoked by the mayor or head of such agency, as the case may be.



   d.   Service in such position in the exempt class shall be credited
as service in the competitive class and the status of such officer or
employee in respect to pensions or otherwise shall not be adversely affected
by such designation.



   e.   Upon the termination of the officer or employee's services in
such exempt position, except by dismissal for cause in the manner provided in
section seventy-five of the civil service law, such officer or employee shall
immediately and without further application return to the position in the
competitive class with the status, rights, privileges and salary enjoyed
immediately prior to the designation to the position in the exempt class.



Section 822. Public buildings and facilities.



   With respect to public buildings and facilities, the commissioner shall
have the following powers and duties:



      (a)   to manage, alter, repair, operate, maintain and clean
buildings, facilities and offices leased or occupied for public use by more
than one city agency whose management, alteration, repair, operation,
maintenance or cleaning is paid for in whole or in part from the city
treasury, and as directed by the mayor, to perform services in space occupied
for public use by a single city agency;



      (b)   except for the provisions of chapter nine of this
charter, to employ, when in the commissioner's opinion such services are
necessary or desirable, qualified consultants in private practice to aid the
commissioner in carrying out his or her duties and responsibilities with
respect to public buildings or facilities; such consulting or advisory
services shall be performed under the supervision of the commissioner;



      (c)   to exercise and perform such other powers and duties as
may be prescribed by law or delegated to him or her in relation to laboratory
testing of commodities and construction materials.    Notwithstanding the
provisions of this section, the exercise of the powers and duties set forth
herein shall be subject to the jurisdiction of any city agency performing
urban renewal and public and publicly-aided housing functions to the extent,
and in such areas, as directed by the mayor.



Section 823. Procurement of goods, other personal property and services.



   With respect to the procurement and disposal of goods and other
personal property and the procurement of services other than personal
services, the commissioner shall have the following powers and duties:



      (a)   to purchase, inspect, store and distribute all goods,
supplies, materials, equipment and other personal property required by any
city agency, except as otherwise provided by law, or by any office of any
county wholly included in the city for which supplies, materials or equipment
are required, payment for which is made from the city treasury;



      (b)   to establish and maintain one or more city storehouses,
operating therein a modern system of stores control, to supply the estimated
current needs of the agencies for which the commissioner is authorized to
purchase. All purchases other than such purchases for stock for estimated
needs and all deliveries from such stock shall be upon justified
requisitions. The commissioner shall also oversee the establishment of
efficient and economical systems of stores control in other city agencies and
review the operations of such storehouses to assure their efficient and
economical management;



      (c)   to receive all surplus and obsolete personal property
not required by any agency for which the commissioner has the power to make
purchases and all such agencies shall surrender such property to the
commissioner who shall dispose thereof pursuant to rules promulgated by him
or her governing its redistribution, exchange, transfer, sale or other
disposition;



      (d)   to procure, supply and manage contractual services other
than personal or professional services for the use of city agencies;



      (e)   to promulgate rules governing the purchase, payment,
storage, and delivery of goods, supplies, materials and equipment by agencies
of the city and the disposal of surplus and obsolete materials, and to
supervise their enforcement;



      (f)   to classify all goods, supplies, materials and
equipment; to adopt as standards the minimum number of qualities, sizes and
types of commodities consistent with efficient operation and life cycle
costs; and to promulgate and enforce written specifications for all such
standard commodities.



Section 824. Real property.



   With respect to real property, the commissioner shall have the
following powers and duties:



      (a)   to purchase, lease condemn or otherwise acquire real
property for the city, subject to the approval of the mayor, and to sell,
lease, exchange or otherwise dispose of real property of the city, subject to
the requirements of section three hundred eighty-four and subject to review
and approval either pursuant to section one hundred ninety-five, if
applicable, or pursuant to sections one hundred ninety-seven-c and one
hundred ninety-seven-d. No such purchase, lease, condemnation or other
acquisition shall be authorized until a public hearing has been held with
respect to such acquisition after the publishing of notice in the City Record
at least ten days but not more than thirty days in advance of such hearing;
provided, however, that in the case of an acquisition by purchase or
condemnation, no such hearing shall be required if a public hearing is held
with respect to such purchase or condemnation pursuant to any other
requirement of law. In the case of a lease in which the city is to be the
tenant, the notice for the hearing required in this subdivision shall include
a statement of the location and proposed use of the premises, and the term
and annual rent of the proposed lease. Before submitting an application
pursuant to section one hundred ninety-seven-c for an acquisition or a
disposition pursuant to this section, the commissioner shall take into
consideration the criteria for location of city facilities established
pursuant to section two hundred three. If two years, not including time spent
in litigation, have elapsed between (1) the final approval of a disposition
or acquisition pursuant to section one hundred ninety-seven-c and section one
hundred ninety-seven-d and (2) execution of an agreement in connection with
such disposition or acquisition, a public hearing shall be held on the
proposed acquisition or disposition after the publishing of notice in the
City Record at least forty-five days in advance of such hearing;



      (b)   to assign and reallocate to city agencies space and real
property owned or leased by the city, to establish comprehensive and
continuing programs and standards for utilization of space owned or leased by
the city and to conduct surveys of space utilization;



      (c)   to manage all real property of the city not used for
public purposes, including real property acquired for a public purpose and
not being currently utilized for such purpose, except wharf property or other
real property under the jurisdiction of the department of small business
services, the department of housing preservation and development, the New
York city transit authority, and the New York city housing authority by
virtue of an authorization granted by the mayor pursuant to the provisions of
subdivision three of section one hundred twenty-five of the public housing
law, or except as otherwise provided by law, real property under the
jurisdiction of the triborough bridge and tunnel authority; provided, that
the commissioner shall be responsible for the management, leasing or
permitting of any parcels of wharf property and water front property as
provided in any designation made by the commissioner of small business
services pursuant to paragraph b of subdivision two of section thirteen
hundred one of this charter;



      (d)   to exercise and perform such other powers and duties as
may be prescribed by law or delegated to the commissioner in relation to the
acquisition, disposition, management, site selection, assignment, demolition
or other treatment of real property of the city;



      (e)   to employ, where desirable, managing agents to manage
city properties and collect rents therefrom and pay bills;



      (f)   to keep, maintain and annually update a master list of
leases wherein the city or its agencies is a tenant. Such master list shall
contain at least the following information: name and address of lessor,
location wherein lease property is situated, base rent, square footage,
escalation provisions, and any other information which the department deems
necessary and appropriate.



Section 825. Communications and energy.



   With respect to communications and energy, the commissioner shall have
the following powers and duties:



      (a)   WNYC Communications Group: to maintain, operate and
administer in conformance with all federal, state and local laws and to use
the facilities of such group to assist any agency which shall require and use
such service and also for the instruction, enlightenment, entertainment,
recreation and welfare of the inhabitants of the city by the broadcast of any
matters which are deemed appropriate and necessary for the public interest
and advantage and to connect such facilities with any broadcasting station to
unite in the broadcasting of such matters and activities;



      (b)   Gas and electricity: to have charge and control of
furnishing the city or any part thereof, by contract or otherwise, with gas,
electricity, steam, hot water or other energy source, except such functions
as are exercised by the public utility service of the city.



Section 826. Data processing services.



   The commissioner shall provide data processing support, programming,
and computer systems analysis services for city agencies when necessary or
desirable, in accordance with executive orders promulgated by the mayor.



Section 827. Automotive services.



   The commissioner shall acquire by purchase, lease or otherwise,
vehicles and other automotive equipment for the use of city agencies; manage,
maintain, store and operate a fleet of motor vehicles; assign fleets to
agencies in accordance with the direction of the mayor and ensure the
effective operation of all shops, yards, garages, fuel depots and other
facilities required for the maintenance of fleets operated by agencies; and
ensure the maintenance of records for all city-owned vehicles.



Section 828. Right of entry.



   The commissioner, officers and employees of the department may, in
accordance with law, enter upon public or private property for the purpose of
making surveys, borings or other investigations necessary for the exercise of
the powers or the performance of the duties of the commissioner and the
department. Refusal to permit such entry shall be a misdemeanor punishable by
not more than thirty days' imprisonment or by a fine of not more than fifty
dollars, or both.



Section 829. Performing administrative functions for the office of
administrative trials and hearings and the board of standards and appeals.



   The mayor may designate the department to perform specified
administrative functions for the office of administrative trials and hearings
and the board of standards and appeal when the mayor determines that such a
designation will reduce costs or result in more effective performance of such
functions. Such functions may include personnel services, labor relations,
facilities management, purchasing, management information systems, budget
administration, and internal auditing.



Chapter 36: Equal Employment Practices Commission



Section 830. [Equal employment practices commission.]



   a.   There shall be an equal employment practices commission which
shall review, evaluate and monitor the employment procedures, practices and
programs of any city agency and the department of citywide administrative
services to maintain an effective affirmative employment program of equal
employment opportunity for minority group members and women who are employed
by or who seek employment with city agencies.



   b.   The commission shall consist of five members who, shall be
compensated on a per diem basis. The mayor and the council shall each appoint
two members. In addition, the mayor and the speaker of the council shall
appoint a fifth member to serve as the chair of the commission for a term of
four years.



   c.   A vacancy in the commission shall not impair the right of the
remaining members to exercise all the powers of the commission and three
members thereof shall constitute a quorum.



   d.   Members shall be appointed for four-year terms except that of
the members first appointed, one of those appointed by the mayor and one of
those appointed by the council shall serve for terms expiring on the
thirtieth day of June, nineteen hundred ninety-two, one of those appointed by
the mayor and one of those appointed by the council shall serve for terms
expiring on the thirtieth day of June nineteen hundred ninety-five; and the
chair shall serve for a term expiring on the thirtieth day of June, nineteen
hundred ninety-four.



   e.   The commission may, within the appropriations available
therefor, appoint an executive director and such deputies, assistants, and
other employees as may be needed for the performance of the duties prescribed
herein.



   f.   The commission may meet as necessary to implement the
provisions of this chapter provided that the commission shall meet at least
once every eight weeks.



Section 831. Duties and powers of the New York city equal employment
practices commission.



   a.   The commission: (i) shall monitor the employment policies,
programs and practices of each city, county, borough or other office,
administration, board, department, division, commission, bureau, corporation,
authority, or other agency of government, where the majority of the board
members of such agency are appointed by the mayor or serve by virtue of being
city officers or the expenses of which are paid in whole or in part from the
city treasury, including the board of education, city and community colleges,
the financial services corporation, the health and hospital corporation, the
public development corporation, and the city housing authority; and (ii)
monitor the coordination and implementation of any city affirmative
employment program of equal employment opportunity for minority group members
and women who are employed by or who seek employment with city agencies,
including the activities of the department of citywide administrative
services, and the civil service commission, pursuant to chapter thirty-five,
and any other agency designated by the mayor to assist in the implementation
or coordination of such efforts, and all city agencies required by section
eight hundred fifteen to establish agency programs



   b.   The commission may request and shall receive from any city
agency such information, other than information which is required by law to
be kept confidential or which is privileged as attorney-client
communications, attorney work products or material prepared for litigation,
and such assistance as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this
chapter.



   c.   The commission shall communicate to the commission on human
rights any information regarding suspected or alleged violations of chapter
one of title eight of the administrative code.



   d.   The commission shall have the following powers and duties:



      1.   to review the uniform standards, procedures, and programs
of the department of citywide administrative services pursuant to paragraphs
twelve and fourteen of subdivision a of section eight hundred fourteen, and
to review the plans adopted by city agencies in accordance with the
provisions of paragraph nineteen of subdivision a of section eight hundred
fifteen, and to provide any such agency or the department of citywide
administrative services with such comments and suggestions as the commission
deems necessary and appropriate;



      2.   to recommend to the department of citywide administrative
services, all city agencies, or any one or more particular agencies,
procedures, approaches, measures, standards and programs to be utilized by
such agencies in their efforts to ensure a fair and effective affirmative
employment program of equal employment opportunity for minority group members
and women who are employed by or seek employment with city agencies;



      3.   to recommend to any city agency actions which such agency
should consider including in its next annual plan as required by paragraph
nineteen of subdivision a of section eight hundred fifteen;



      4.   to advise and, if requested, assist city agencies in
their efforts to increase employment of minority group members and women who
are employed by or who seek employment with city agencies;



      5.   to audit and evaluate the employment practices and
procedures of each city agency and their efforts to ensure fair and effective
equal employment opportunity for minority group members and women at least
once every four years and whenever requested by the civil service commission
or the human rights commission or whenever otherwise deemed necessary by this
commission;



      6.   to make such policy, legislative and budgetary
recommendations to the mayor, council, the department of citywide
administrative services or any city agency as the commission deems necessary
to ensure equal employment opportunity for minority group members and women;



      7.   to publish by the fifteenth of February of each year a
report to the mayor and the council on the activities of the commission and
the effectiveness of each city agency's affirmative employment efforts and
the efforts by the department of citywide administrative services to ensure
equal employment opportunity for minority group members and women who are
employed by or seek to be employed by city agencies;



      8.   to establish appropriate advisory committees;



      9.   to serve with such other agencies or officials as shall
be designated by the mayor as the city liaison to federal, state and local
agencies responsible for compliance with equal employment opportunity for
minority group members and women who are employed by or who seek to be
employed by city agencies; and



      10.   to take such other actions as are appropriate to
effectuate the provisions and purposes of this chapter.



Section 832. Compliance Procedures.



   a.   The commission shall conduct such study or investigations and
hold such hearings as may be necessary to determine whether agencies are in
compliance with the equal employment opportunity requirements of this chapter
and chapter thirty-five.



   b.   For the purpose of ascertaining facts in connection with any
study or investigation authorized by this chapter, the commission shall have
power to compel the attendance of witnesses, to administer oaths and to
examine such persons as they may deem necessary. The commission or any agent
or employee thereof duly designated in writing by them for such purposes may
administer oaths or affirmations, examine witnesses in public or private
hearing, receive evidence and preside at or conduct any such study or
investigation.



   c.   If the commission makes a preliminary determination pursuant to
subdivision d of section eight hundred thirty-one, that any plan, program,
procedure, approach, measures or standard adopted or utilized by any city
agency or the department of citywide administrative services does not provide
equal employment opportunity; and/or if the commission makes a preliminary
determination pursuant to this chapter and chapter thirty-five, that an
agency has not provided equal employment opportunity, the commission shall
notify the agency in writing of this determination and provide an opportunity
for the agency to respond. If the commission, after consideration of any such
response and after consulting with the agency, concludes that the corrective
actions, if any, taken or planned by the agency are not sufficient to correct
the non-compliance identified in the preliminary determination, it should
make a final determination in writing, including such recommended corrective
action as the commission may deem appropriate. The agency shall within thirty
days thereafter respond to the commission on any corrective action it intends
to make and shall make monthly reports to such commission on the progress of
such corrective action. If the commission, after a period not to exceed six
months, determines that the agency has not taken appropriate and effective
corrective action, the commission shall notify the agency in writing of this
determination and the commission may thereafter publish a report and
recommend to the mayor whatever appropriate corrective action the commission
deems necessary to ensure compliance with equal employment opportunity
pursuant to the requirements of this chapter and chapter thirty-five. Within
thirty days of such determination the agency shall submit a written response
to the commission and the mayor. The mayor after reviewing the commission's
findings and the agency's response, if any, shall order and publish such
action as he or she deems appropriate.



Chapter 37: Art Commission



Section 851. Constitution and appointment.



   a.   There shall be an art commission the members of which shall be
the mayor, who may appoint a person to represent him and replace such
representative at his pleasure, the president of the Metropolitan Museum of
Art, the president of the New York Public Library (Astor, Lenox and Tilden
foundations), the president of the Brooklyn Museum, one painter, one
sculptor, one architect, and one landscape architect, all of whom shall be
residents of the city, and three other residents of the city no one of whom
shall be a painter, sculptor, architect, landscape architect or active member
of any other profession in the fine arts.



   b.   All the members of the commission shall serve without
compensation for their service on the commission. Those whose service is not
ex officio shall be appointed by the mayor from a list of not less than three
times the number to be appointed, such list to be submitted by the Fine Arts
Federation of New York. In case the Fine Arts Federation shall fail to
present a list of nominees within three months from the time when a vacancy
occurs, the mayor shall appoint without such nomination. In case the mayor
shall fail to appoint within one year from the time when a vacancy occurs,
such vacancy shall be filled by the commission for any balance of the
unexpired term.



   c.   In all matters which come before the commission pertaining to
work under the special charge of an agency, the head of such agency may act
as a member of the commission. Each president of an institution who is an ex
officio member may, by a writing filed with the executive director of the
commission, appoint a trustee of the institution of which he is president to
serve in his place as member of the commission. Such appointment shall be
revocable at any time by such president and shall terminate whenever he
ceases to be president.



Section 852. Terms of members; vacancies.



   All appointments of members of the commission whose service is not ex
officio shall be for a term of three years commencing at the expiration of
the terms of the present incumbents, except that appointments to fill
vacancies shall be for the unexpired term. All vacancies shall be filled in
accordance with the provisions of section eight hundred fifty-one.



Section 853. Officers; procedure; expenses.



   a.   The commission shall elect a president, vice-president and
secretary from its own members, whose terms of office shall be for one year
and until their successors are elected and have qualified. The commission
shall keep minutes of its proceedings and adopt its own rules of procedure,
which shall be public documents. Six commissioners, excluding any who may be
acting temporarily as representatives of an agency pursuant to subdivision c
of section eight hundred fifty-one, shall constitute a quorum.



   b.   The offices and staff necessary for the commission to fulfill
its obligations shall be provided for the commission, and the amount of its
necessary expenses shall annually be provided in the budget.



Section 854. Approvals by the commission.



   a.   The term "works of art" as used in this chapter shall apply to
and include all sculptures, paintings, mural decorations, mosaics, stained
glass, statues, carvings or castings in high or low relief, inscriptions,
monuments, and fountains installed or erected or to be installed or erected
upon or over land belonging to the city whether the works of art be the
property of the city itself or of an institution, corporation or private
individual, and whether intended for ornament, commemoration or actual use.



   b.   The term "structure" as used in this chapter shall apply to and
include all buildings, walks, bridges and viaducts and their approaches,
exterior walls, arches, docks, piers, gates, fences, steps, curbing,
distinctive pavings, benches, lamps, posts, traffic signals, and signage
other than signage guiding, directing or otherwise regulating and controlling
traffic erected pursuant to chapter seventy-one of the charter.



   c.   On request or on its own initiative, the art commission may
consult with and advise any such agency as to the suitability of preliminary
plans for any work of art under consideration for acquisition or the design
or location of any work of art or any structure under consideration for
installation or erection in, on or over any property of the city.



   d.   No work of art shall hereafter become the property of the city
by gift or otherwise, or be purchased, commissioned, contracted for,
accepted, erected or placed in or upon any public building, or allowed to be
placed on or extend into or over any public street, avenue, highway, square,
park, dock or pier or other public place belonging to the city, unless such
work of art or a design of the same, accompanied by a specification and an
estimate of the cost thereof, a plan showing its proposed location, and, if
the commission deems it necessary or desirable, also a model, and any other
pertinent information as may be required by the commission including a plan
in such detail as the commission may require for the maintenance or
conservation thereof, shall first have been submitted to the commission by
the agency having jurisdiction, and such work of art or the design thereof,
its location, and the plan for its maintenance or conservation, shall have
been approved in writing by the commission. The commission shall have
authority to bar final payment for the purchase or erection of any such work
of art if the president or executive director of the commission certifies
that the work of art has not been completed substantially in accordance with
the approval of the commission.



   e.   No structure, except as provided in subdivision f or h, shall
be erected or placed upon land belonging to the city, and no arch, bridge,
structure or approach which is the property of any corporation or private
individual shall extend over or upon any street, avenue, highway, park or
public place belonging to the city, and no new lines, grades or plotting or
layout of public ways and grounds shall be accepted or work in pursuance
thereof commenced unless the design thereof, accompanied by an estimate of
cost and a plan showing the proposed location, shall have been submitted to
the commission and the design, and in the case of a building or other
structure its location in relation to existing or projected developments in
the vicinity, shall have been approved in writing by it. If exterior wall,
fences, gates, steps, curbing, distinctive paving, benches, lamps, posts,
signage, traffic signals or other structures of the same type and design are
considered for installation at various locations, the commission may approve
the type and design with specifications as to the types of location for which
they would be approved as suitable without passing on each individual
installation. In addition, replacements-in-kind need not be approved by the
commission. The commission shall have the authority to bar final payment for
such structure, or for such lines, grades or plotting or layout of public
ways and grounds if the president or executive director of the commission
certifies that the work has not been erected or placed substantially in
accordance with the approval of the commission.



   f.   In the case of any building or other structure that is part of
a construction or other project, where the total estimated cost of such
project shall not exceed one million dollars, the approval of the commission
pursuant to this section shall not be required if the mayor or the council
shall in writing request the commission not to act. Nothing in this section
shall be construed as intended to impair the concurrent power of the
commissioner of parks and recreation to refuse his or her consent to the
erection or acceptance of any public monument or memorial or other work of
any sort within any park, square or other public place under his jurisdiction.



   g.   Designs for all works of art or structures intended for
temporary use in a fixed location during a period of more than one year,
shall be subject to the same forms of procedure as those adopted for
permanent use; but the approval of such designs shall be for a period to be
determined by the commission, not to exceed three years, after which the
commission shall either extend the period or order the removal of the work of
art or structure.



   h.   Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of this chapter, if
an approval of a structure pursuant to subdivision e of this section
primarily concerns a landmark, landmark site, landmark interior, an existing
building within a scenic landmark, or an action within an historic district,
and also requires a report or determination by the landmarks preservation
commission pursuant to chapter three of title twenty-five of the
administrative code of the city of New York, then, in that event, the powers
and duties of the art commission with respect to such structures pursuant to
such subdivision e and subdivisions f and g of this section shall instead be
exercised by the landmarks preservation commission pursuant to its own rules
and procedures. If such commission shall fail to take action upon any matter
legally submitted to it within sixty days after such submission, its action
shall be deemed unnecessary. Any action taken by such commission pursuant to
this subdivision shall be filed with the art commission.



Section 855. Time for decision limited.



   If the commission shall fail to take action upon any matter legally
submitted to it within sixty days after such submission, its action shall be
deemed unnecessary.



Section 856. Maintenance, repair, removal, relocation or alteration of works
of art.



   a.   The commission shall periodically examine all works of art
belonging to the city, shall make, request or approve detailed
recommendations for their cleaning, maintenance and repair, and shall have
general and curatorial supervision over such works of art belonging to the
city and their cleaning, maintenance and repair. Except as provided in
subdivision d, no cleaning, restoration, repair, alteration, removal or
relocation of any work of art shall be contracted for, commenced, or
prosecuted, unless approved in writing by the commission. Except as provided
in subdivision d, the commission shall have the authority to bar final
payment for such work if the president or the executive director of the
commission certifies that the work has not been completed substantially in
accordance with the commission's approval.



   b.   If a city agency fails to expend funds allocated for the proper
maintenance of works of art, or allows undue deterioration to occur which
threatens the visual and structural integrity of any work of art under its
jurisdiction, the commission shall be authorized to review the procedures
governing the care of said work and may request the agency to relocate such
work to a suitable location approved by the commission.



   c.   Before any work of art is repaired, altered, demolished,
removed, or relocated, the art commission shall be notified and given an
opportunity, not to exceed sixty days, to pass on the disposition of such
work of art. The commission may, with the consent of the mayor, order the
work of art to be preserved. Except as provided in subdivision d, no work of
art shall be altered, demolished, removed or relocated without the written
approval of the commission.



   d.   In case the immediate removal, repair or relocation of any
existing work of art shall be deemed necessary by the mayor, he may require
the commission to pass on its disposition within an emergency period, which
shall be not less than three business days after the receipt of written
notice from him. In case of the commission's failure to act within such
period, he may authorize the removal, repair or relocation without such
action.



Section 857. Advisory oversight of works of art.



Editor's note: this section has been amended by L.L. 2019/136, 7/14/2019,
eff. 11/11/2019.



   a.   The art commission shall have general advisory oversight over
all works of art belonging to the city. It shall advise the agencies having
jurisdiction over them as to methods and procedures for their proper
maintenance.



   b.   The commission shall maintain and make available for inspection
a register of (i) works of art in the city's collection which have been
preserved and (ii) works of art in the city's collection which are available,
as determined by either the agency or the commission, for a new use or
relocation. Every agency shall maintain a list of works of art installed in
or erected upon city property assigned for use by the agency and shall notify
the commission whenever a work of art becomes available, in its judgment, for
a new use or relocation.



Section 858. Notice of agenda.



   A printed calendar of items to be heard, which may be subject to later
amendment, shall be made available to the public and forwarded to members of
the council at least three days in advance of the meeting.



Section 859. Annual report.



Editor's note: this section has been amended by L.L. 2019/136, 7/14/2019,
eff. 11/11/2019.



   1.   Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms have
the following meanings:



      Acted upon. The term "acted upon" means an action by the
commission on a submission in the form of an approval, approval with
conditions, or rejection.



      Commented upon. The term "commented upon" means written comments
on a submission provided to the sponsoring agency by the commission, a
special committee within the commission or the executive director as
designated by the commission.



      Review cycle. The term "review cycle" means the time between the
deadline for the filing of a submission to the commission and the scheduled
date of the next public meeting of the commission.



   2.   Not later than August 1, 2018 and no later than August 1 every
year thereafter, the commission shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of
the council a report with the following data for the previous calendar year:



      i.   Total number of submissions received by the commission,
including submissions for conceptual, preliminary and final review, and
disaggregated by the following:



         (a)   Construction, renovation, or restoration of
structures, including but not limited to buildings and bridges;



         (b)   Construction or reconstruction of parks, open
spaces, and streetscapes;



         (c)   Distinctive sidewalks;



         (d)   Distinctive lighting;



         (e)   Newsstands;



         (f)   Signage;



         (g)   Installation of new works of art;



         (h)   Conservation of works of art;



         (i)   Removal or relocation of works of art;



         (j)   Private structures extending over or upon
city-owned land;



      ii.   (a)   Total number of submissions received by the
commission where the review cycle extended into the following year;



         (b)   Total number of submissions received by the
commission prior to the year being reported that were not acted upon by the
commission in the year being reported;



      iii.   Number of submissions acted or commented upon,
disaggregated by the following:



         (a)   Number of submissions approved;



         (b)   Number of submissions approved with conditions;



         (c)   Number of submissions rejected in whole;



         (d)   Number of submissions commented upon;



      iv.   (a)   Percentage of submissions acted upon in one
review cycle;



         (b)   Percentage of submissions acted upon in two review
cycles;



         (c)   Percentage of submissions acted upon in three or
more review cycles;



      v.   Number of submissions received, disaggregated by city
agency and borough;



      vi.   Names of commission members during the year being
reported;



      vii.   Summary of methods or procedure used to determine
approval or rejection of submissions;



      viii.   Any other information the commission deems relevant.



(L.L. 2017/017, 2/15/2017)



Chapter 38: Financial Information Services Agency



Section 860. Financial information services agency.



   There shall be a financial information services agency which shall be
headed by three directors appointed by the mayor, one of whom shall be
appointed upon the recommendation of the comptroller, and one of whom shall
be appointed upon the recommendation of the other two. The directors may be
city employees. They shall receive no compensation for their services to the
agency (except that a city employee may continue to receive regular
compensation) but shall be compensated for expenses actually and necessarily
incurred in the performance of their duties.



Section 861. Powers and duties.



   a.   The agency shall have the power and duty to:



      (1)   implement and manage the integrated financial management
system;



      (2)   control and exercise responsibility for all data
processing functions and operations of the city which support the activities
of those officers, employees, and agencies of the city responsible for
organizing, compiling, coordinating and reporting upon the city's central
financial records, data and other related information;



      (3)   provide efficient, coordinated and rapid access to such
information for the use of those officers, employees, and agencies of the
city responsible for the determination and administration of the estimated
and actual expenditures of the city; the receipt, investment and disbursement
of city funds; the issuance and payment of principal and interest on
obligations of the city; and for the use of such other officers, employees,
or agencies as may require such information;



      (4)   render services to, and receive information and
assistance from, such other bodies defined as "covered organizations" in the
New York state financial emergency act for the city of New York, as amended,
upon such terms and conditions as may be agreed to by the agency and each
such body.



   b.   All agencies shall furnish such information or equipment in
their possession as shall be necessary and proper to carry out the functions
of the financial information services agency as determined by its executive
director with the approval of its directors.



Section 862. Staff.



   The directors shall recommend and the mayor shall appoint an executive
director of financial information services. Within the appropriations
therefor, the agency shall employ such other officers and employees as may be
required to perform its duties.



Chapter 39: Office Of Payroll Administration



Section 870. Office of payroll administration.



   There shall be an office of payroll administration which shall be
headed by two directors appointed by the mayor, one of whom shall be
appointed upon the recommendation of the comptroller. The directors may be
city employees. They shall receive no compensation for their services to the
office (except that a city employee may continue to receive regular
compensation) but shall be compensated for expenses actually and necessarily
incurred in the performance of their duties.



Section 871. Powers and duties.



   a.   The office of payroll administration shall have the power and
duty to:



      (1)   support the implementation of a computerized payroll
management system,



      (2)   maintain the integrity and accuracy of the payroll
system,



      (3)   develop uniform procedures for payroll processing and
development,



      (4)   distribute and account for payroll and administer
payroll deductions,



      (5)   render services to, and receive information and
assistance from, public corporations upon such terms and conditions as may be
agreed to by the office and each such corporation.



   b.   All city agencies shall cooperate with the office as may be
necessary and proper to ensure efficient operation of the payroll management
system.



Section 872. Staff.



   Upon the recommendation of the directors, the mayor shall appoint an
executive director of payroll administration. Within the appropriations
therefor, the office shall employ such other officers and employees as may be
required to perform its duties.



Chapter 40: New York City Human Rights Commission



Section 900. Declaration of intent.



   It is the public policy of the city to promote equal opportunity and
freedom from unlawful discrimination through the provisions of the city's
human rights law.



(Am. L.L. 2018/063, 1/19/2018, eff. 10/16/2018)



Section 901. Executive orders.



   The mayor may issue such executive orders as the mayor deems
appropriate to provide for city agencies and contractors to act in accordance
with the policy set forth in this chapter.



(Am. L.L. 2018/063, 1/19/2018, eff. 10/16/2018)



Section 902. Commission on human rights.



   a.    The New York city commission on human rights is hereby
established and continued.



   b.   The commission has general jurisdiction and power to eliminate
and prevent unlawful discrimination by enforcing the provisions of chapter 1
of title 8 of the administrative code and also has the powers conferred upon
such commission by such title and all other applicable laws in furtherance of
the elimination and prevention of such unlawful discrimination. The
commission may, in addition, take such other actions as may be provided by
law against prejudice, intolerance, bigotry and unlawful discrimination and
has the powers and duties conferred by this chapter and any other law in
furtherance of such purposes. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to
limit the powers of the corporation counsel pursuant to applicable law.



(Am. L.L. 2018/063, 1/19/2018, eff. 10/16/2018)



Section 903. Commission membership; chairperson; appointment; vacancy.



   The commission shall consist of 15 members, to be appointed by the
mayor, one of whom shall be designated by the mayor as its chairperson and
shall serve as such at the pleasure of the mayor. The chairperson shall
devote the chairperson's entire time to the chairperson's duties and shall
not engage in any other occupation, profession or employment. Members other
than the chairperson shall serve without compensation for a term of three
years. In the event of the death or resignation of any member, such member's
successor shall be appointed to serve for the unexpired portion of the term
for which such member had been appointed.



(Am. L.L. 2018/063, 1/19/2018, eff. 10/16/2018)



Section 904. Functions.



   The functions of the commission are:



   a.   To foster mutual understanding and respect among all persons in
the city;



   b.   To encourage equality of treatment for, and prevent
discrimination against, any group or its members;



   c.   To cooperate with governmental and non-governmental agencies
and organizations having like or kindred functions; and



   d.   To make such investigations and studies in the field of human
relations as in the judgment of the commission will aid in effectuating its
general purposes.



(Am. L.L. 2018/063, 1/19/2018, eff. 10/16/2018)



Section 905. Powers and duties.



   The powers and duties of the commission shall be exercised in a manner
consistent with this chapter, title 8 of the administrative code and all
other applicable laws and include but are not limited to the following:



   a.   Public education and other activities. To work together with
federal, state and city agencies in developing courses of instruction, for
presentation to city employees and in public and private schools, public
libraries, museums and other suitable places, on techniques for achieving
harmonious intergroup relations within the city and on types of bias-related
harassment and repeated hostile behavior including conduct or verbal threats,
taunting, intimidation, abuse, and cyberbullying, and to engage in other
anti-discrimination activities. For the purposes of this subdivision, the
term "cyberbullying" means willful and repeated harm inflicted through the
use of computers, cell phones, and other electronic devices that is intended
to frighten, harass, cause harm to, extort, or otherwise target another;



   b.   Cooperation with groups and organizations. To enlist the
cooperation of various groups and organizations in mediation efforts,
programs and campaigns devoted to eliminating group prejudice, intolerance,
hate crimes, bigotry and discrimination. For the purposes of this
subdivision, the term "hate crime" means a crime that manifests evidence of
prejudice based on race, religion, ethnicity, disability, sexual orientation,
national origin, age, gender, or alienage or citizenship status;



   c.   Studies. To study the problems of prejudice, intolerance,
bigotry, discrimination and disorder occasioned thereby in all or any fields
of human relationship;



   d.   Investigations and complaints; referral.



      1.   To receive, investigate and pass upon complaints and to
initiate its own investigation of: (i) group tensions, prejudice,
intolerance, bigotry and disorder occasioned thereby, and (ii) unlawful
discrimination against any person or group of persons, except that with
respect to discrimination alleged to be committed by city officials or city
agencies, such investigation shall be commenced after consultation with the
mayor;



      2.   Upon its own motion, to make, sign and file
administrative complaints alleging violations of the city's human rights law;
and



      3.   In the event that any investigation undertaken pursuant
to paragraph 1 of this subdivision discloses information that any person or
group of persons may be engaged in a pattern or practice that results in the
denial to any person or group of persons of the full enjoyment of any right
secured by the human rights law, in addition to making, signing and filing an
administrative complaint upon its own motion pursuant to paragraph 2 of this
subdivision, to refer such information to the corporation counsel for the
purpose of commencing a civil action pursuant to chapter 4 of title 8 of the
administrative code;



   e.   Hearings and production of evidence; order to preserve records.



      1.   To issue subpoenas in the manner provided for in the
civil practice law and rules compelling the attendance of witnesses and
requiring the production of any evidence relating to any matter under
investigation or any question before the commission, and to take proof with
respect thereto;



      2.   To hold hearings, administer oaths and take testimony of
any person under oath;



      3.   To require the production of any names of persons
necessary for the investigation of any institution, club or other place or
provider of accommodation; and



      4.   To require, in accordance with the provisions of
subdivision b of section 8-114 of the administrative code, any person or
persons who are the subject of an investigation by the commission to preserve
such records as are in the possession of such person or persons and to
continue to make and keep the type of records that have been made and kept by
such person or persons in the ordinary course of business within the previous
year, which records are relevant to the determination whether such person or
persons have committed unlawful discriminatory practices or other acts made
unlawful by chapter 1 or chapter 6 of title 8 of the administrative code with
respect to activities in the city;



   f.   Publications and reports. To issue publications and reports of
investigation and research designed to promote good will and minimize or
eliminate prejudice, intolerance, bigotry, discrimination and disorder
occasioned thereby;



   g.   Appointments and assignments; expenses. To appoint such
employees and agents as it deems to be necessary to carry out its functions,
powers and duties and to assign to such persons any of such functions, powers
and duties, except that the commission shall not delegate its power to adopt
rules and also except that the commission's power to order that records be
preserved or made and kept pursuant to subdivision b of section 8-114 of the
administrative code and the commission's power to determine that a respondent
has engaged in an unlawful discriminatory practice and to issue an order for
such relief as is necessary and proper shall be delegated only to members of
the commission. The expenses for the carrying on of the commission's
activities shall be paid out of the funds in the city treasury. The
commission's appointment and assignment powers as set forth in this
subdivision may be exercised by the chairperson of the commission;



   h.   Recommendations. To recommend to the mayor and to the council
legislation to aid in carrying out the purposes of this chapter;



   i.   Annual reporting. To submit a report by September 30, 2018 and
September 30 of each year thereafter to the mayor and the speaker of the
council. Such report shall be published in the City Record and shall include
information for the previous fiscal year regarding: (i) inquiries received by
the commission from the public; (ii) investigations initiated by the
commission; (iii) complaints filed with the commission; and (iv) education
and outreach efforts made by the commission.



      1.   The information regarding inquiries received by the
commission from the public shall include, but not be limited to: (i) the
total number of inquiries; (ii) the number of inquiries made by limited
English proficient persons disaggregated by language; (iii) the subject
matter of inquiries disaggregated by the alleged category of unlawful
discriminatory practice as set forth by section 8-107 of the administrative
code and the protected class of person; and (iv) the number of inquiries
resolved by pre-complaint intervention.



      2.   The information regarding investigations initiated by the
commission shall include, but not be limited to: (i) the total number of
investigations initiated by the commission disaggregated by the category of
unlawful discriminatory practice as set forth by section 8-107 of the
administrative code and the protected class at issue; (ii) the total number
of commission-initiated complaints filed pursuant to section 8-109 of the
administrative code after an investigation finding that a person or group of
persons may be engaged in a pattern or practice of discrimination; (iii) the
total number of investigations referred to the corporation counsel for the
purpose of commencing a civil action pursuant to chapter 4 of title 8 of the
administrative code; and (iv) the total number of publications and reports of
investigations designed to promote good will and minimize or eliminate
prejudice, intolerance, bigotry, discrimination and disorder occasioned
thereby.



      3.   The information regarding complaints filed with the
commission shall include, but not be limited to, the number of complaints
filed with the commission and shall be disaggregated by: (i) the category of
unlawful discriminatory practice, as set forth by section 8-107 of the
administrative code, alleged; (ii) the basis of the alleged discriminatory
practice based on protected class of the complainant; (iii) whether the
complaint was resolved by mediation and conciliation, as set forth in section
8-115 of the administrative code; a determination of no probable cause, as
set forth in section 8-116 of the administrative code; or a hearing, as set
forth by section 8-119 of the administrative code; (iv) the number of days
the complaint was outstanding at the time such resolution occurred; and (v)
whether a fine, penalty or cash award was imposed and, if so, the dollar
amount of such fine, penalty or cash award.



      4.   The information regarding the commission's education and
outreach efforts as required by subdivisions a and b of this section shall
include, but not be limited to: (i) the types of outreach initiated; (ii) the
number of people with whom the commission made contact as a result of
outreach; (iii) the number of limited English proficient persons served; and
(iv) the languages in which such outreach was conducted; and



   j.   Rules. To adopt rules to carry out the powers and duties
delegated to the commission by this chapter, title 8 of the administrative
code or any other law, and the policies and procedures of the commission in
connection therewith.



(Am. L.L. 2018/063, 1/19/2018, eff. 1/19/2018 and 10/16/2018)



Section 906. Relations with city departments and agencies.



   So far as practicable and subject to the approval of the mayor, the
services of all other city departments and agencies shall be made available
by their respective heads to the commission for the carrying out of the
functions stated in this chapter. The head of any department or agency shall
furnish information in the possession of such department or agency when the
commission so requests. The corporation counsel, upon request of the
chairperson, may assign counsel to assist the commission in the conduct of
its investigative or prosecutorial functions.



(Am. L.L. 2018/063, 1/19/2018, eff. 10/16/2018)



Chapter 45: City Administrative Procedure Act



Section 1041. Definitions.



   As used herein, the term



      1.   "Adjudication" means a proceeding in which the legal
rights, duties or privileges of named parties are required by law to be
determined by an agency on a record and after an opportunity for a hearing.



      2.   "Agency" means any one or more of the elected or
appointed officers provided for in this charter and any other official or
entity which is acting (1) under the direction of one or more of such
officers, (2) under the direction of one or more other officials who are
appointed by, or appointed on the recommendation of, such officers, or (3)
under the direction of a board, the majority of whose members are appointed
by, or appointed upon the recommendation of, one or more of such officers,
but shall not include the city council.



      3.   "Compilation" means the Compilation of city rules
required to be published under section one thousand forty-five.



      4.   "Law" means federal, state and local law, this charter,
and rules issued pursuant thereto.



      5.   "Rule" means the whole or part of any statement or
communication of general applicability that (i) implements or applies law or
policy, or (ii) prescribes the procedural requirements of an agency including
an amendment, suspension, or repeal of any such statement or communication.



         a.   "Rule" shall include, but not be limited to, any
statement or communication which prescribes (i) standards which, if violated,
may result in a sanction or penalty; (ii) a fee to be charged by or required
to be paid to an agency; (iii) standards for the issuance, suspension or
revocation of a license or permit; (iv) standards for any product, material,
or service which must be met before manufacture, distribution, sale or use;
(v) standards for the procurement of goods and services; (vi) standards for
the disposition of public property or property under agency control; or (vii)
standards for the granting of loans or other benefits.



         b.   "Rule" shall not include any (i) statement or
communication which relates only to the internal management or personnel of
an agency which does not materially affect the rights of or procedures
available to the public; (ii) form, instruction, or statement or
communication of general policy, which in itself has no legal effect but is
merely explanatory; (iii) statement or communication concerning the
allocation of agency resources or personnel; (iv) statement or communication
for guiding, directing or otherwise regulating vehicular and pedestrian
traffic, including but not limited to any statement or communication
controlling parking, standing, stopping or a construction detour, the
contents of which is indicated to the public in signs, signals, markings and
similar devices, the determination and installation of which is based on
engineering or other technical considerations not involving substantial
policy considerations; (v) statement or communication effecting a
non-continuous closing of a street; or (vi) statement or communication
adopted pursuant to sections fifty-one, one hundred ninety-seven-a except
pursuant to the first sentence of subdivision b or the third sentence of
subdivision c of section one hundred ninety-seven-a, one hundred
ninety-seven-c except pursuant to subdivisions i and l of section one hundred
ninety-seven-c, one hundred ninety-nine, two hundred, two hundred one, two
hundred two and seven hundred five of this charter.



Section 1042. Regulatory agenda.



   a.   Each agency shall publish by the first day of May annually, a
regulatory agenda which shall contain:



      1.   a brief description of the subject areas in which it is
anticipated that rules may be promulgated during the next fiscal year,
including a description of the reasons why action by the agency is being
considered;



      2.   a summary, to the extent known, of the anticipated
contents of each such proposed rule, its objectives and legal basis;



      3.   a description of the types of individuals and entities
likely to be subject to the rule;



      4.   an identification, to the extent practicable, of all
relevant federal, state, and local laws and rules, including those which may
duplicate, overlap or conflict with the proposed rule; and



      5.   an approximate schedule for adopting the proposed rule,
and the name and telephone number of an agency official knowledgeable about
each subject area involved.



   b.   Each agency the single head of which is appointed by the mayor
shall forward to the mayor its regulatory agenda. The mayor shall review such
regulatory agenda to determine whether regulations contemplated by city
agencies are consistent with the policy objectives of the administration.



   c.   Failure to include an item in a regulatory agenda shall not
preclude action thereon. If rulemaking is undertaken on a matter not included
in the regulatory agenda the agency shall include in the notice of proposed
rulemaking the reason the rule was not anticipated. The inadvertent failure
to provide the reason such rule was not included in the regulatory agenda
shall not serve to invalidate the rule.



Section 1043. Rulemaking.



   a.   Authority. Each agency is empowered to adopt rules necessary to
carry out the powers and duties delegated to it by or pursuant to federal,
state or local law. No agency shall adopt a rule except pursuant to this
section. Each such rule shall be simply written, using ordinary language
where possible.



   b.   Notice.



      1.   Each agency shall publish the full text of the proposed
rule in the City Record at least thirty days prior to the date set for a
public hearing to be held pursuant to the requirements of subdivision e of
this section or the final date for receipt of written comments, whichever is
earlier. A proposed rule amending an existing rule shall contain in brackets
any part to be deleted and shall have underlined or italicized any new part
to be added. A proposed rule repealing an existing rule shall contain in
brackets the rule to be repealed, or if the full text of the rule was
published in the Compilation required to be published pursuant to section one
thousand forty-five, shall give the citation of the rule to be repealed and a
summary of its contents. Such published notice shall include a draft
statement of the basis and purpose of the proposed rule, the statutory
authority, including the particular sections and subdivisions upon which the
action is based, the time and place of public hearing, if any, to be held or
the reason that a public hearing will not be held, and the final date for
receipt of written comments. If the proposed rule was not included in the
regulatory agenda, such notice shall also include the reason the rule was not
anticipated, as required in subdivision c of section one thousand forty-two
of this chapter.



      2.   Copies of the full text of the proposed rule shall be
electronically transmitted to the office of the speaker of the council, the
council's office of legislative documents, the corporation counsel, each
council member, the chairs of all community boards, the news media and civic
organizations no later than the date the proposed rule is transmitted to the
City Record for publication pursuant to paragraph one of subdivision b of
this section; provided that an inadvertent failure to fully comply with the
notice requirements of this paragraph shall not serve to invalidate any rule.



      3.   (a)   News media, for the purposes of this
subdivision, shall include (i) all radio and television stations broadcasting
in the city of New York, all newspapers published in the city of New York
having a city-wide or borough-wide circulation, and any newspaper of any
labor union or trade association representing an industry affected by such
rule, and (ii) any community newspaper or any other publication that requests
such notification on an annual basis.



         (b)   Civic organizations, for the purposes of this
subdivision, shall include any city-wide or borough-wide organization or any
labor union, trade association or other group that requests such notification
on an annual basis.



      4.   In addition to the requirements set forth in paragraph
one of this subdivision, each agency shall provide information regarding the
public hearing to be held with regard to a proposed rule in a prominent
location on such agency's website at least seven days prior to the date set
for such hearing. Each agency shall further provide, in a prominent location
on such agency's website, a link to the NYC Rules online portal or any
successor city website or page that is substantially similar in form or
function. Each agency shall, to the greatest extent practicable, and in
addition to the electronic transmissions required by paragraph two of this
subdivision, publicize upcoming public hearings via electronic means that are
likely to reach interested members of the public. This paragraph shall not be
construed to create a private right of action to enforce its provisions.
Inadvertent failure to comply with this paragraph shall not result in the
invalidation of any rule.



   c.   Review of statutory authority. The corporation counsel shall
review the proposed rule to determine whether it is within the authority
delegated by law to the agency proposing the rule. If the corporation counsel
determines that the proposed rule is not within the agency's delegated
authority, the corporation counsel shall notify the agency in writing prior
to the publication of the final rule in the City Record.



   d.   1.   The law department and the mayor's office of operations
shall review each proposed rule prior to publication of such proposed rule in
the City Record. At the conclusion of its review, the law department shall
state whether each proposed rule: (i) is drafted so as to accomplish the
purpose of the authorizing provisions of law; (ii) is not in conflict with
other applicable rules; (iii) to the extent practicable and appropriate, is
narrowly drawn to achieve its stated purpose; and (iv) to the extent
practicable and appropriate, contains a statement of basis and purpose that
provides a clear explanation of the rule and the requirements imposed by the
rule. As part of its review, the mayor's office of operations shall analyze
each proposed rule and state: (a) whether such rule is understandable and
written in plain language; (b) how the drafting process of the rule, to the
extent practicable and appropriate, included analysis sufficient to minimize
the compliance costs for the discrete regulated community or communities, to
the extent one exists, consistent with achieving the stated purpose of the
rule; and (c) why, in the event such rule involves the establishment of a
violation, modification of a violation or modification of the penalties
associated with a violation without also including a cure period, or other
opportunity for ameliorative action by the party or parties subject to
enforcement, such cure period or other opportunity for ameliorative action
was not included. Provided, however, that if the proposed rule solely
establishes or modifies the amount of a monetary penalty or penalties then
the law department statement required by this paragraph shall not be required
and the analysis of the office of operations may be limited to the reason or
reasons a cure period or other opportunity for ameliorative action was not
included.



      2.   After completing the review as set forth in paragraph one
of this subdivision, the law department and the mayor's office of operations
shall certify that they have performed such review, and shall promptly
transmit a copy of such certification, including the analysis performed by
the mayor's office of operations, to the relevant agency. Such agency shall
annex such certification and analysis to the full text of the proposed rule
as published in the City Record. Such certification and analysis shall also
be made available to the public on the city's website and transmitted to the
speaker of the city council at the time of publication. In no event shall a
proposed rule be submitted for initial publication in the City Record unless
the law department and the mayor's office of operations have issued such
certification and analysis.



      3.   This subdivision shall not be construed to create a
private right of action to enforce its provisions. Inadvertent failure to
comply with this subdivision shall not result in the invalidation of any rule.



      4.   This subdivision shall not apply to rules that: (i) are
promulgated pursuant to the emergency procedures set forth in subdivision i
of this section; (ii) are solely concerned with the establishment or
modification of the amount of a monetary penalty or penalties, and the
underlying violation or a modification of the penalties associated with such
violation has previously been analyzed in accordance with paragraph one of
this subdivision; (iii) are solely concerned with the establishment or
modification of the amount of a fee or fees or (iv) implement particular
mandates or standards set forth in newly enacted federal, state, or local
laws, regulations or other requirements with only minor, if any, exercise of
agency discretion in interpreting such mandates or standards. If an analysis
of a proposed rule is not performed pursuant to the exceptions noted in this
paragraph, such fact shall be noted and the note annexed to the full text of
the proposed rule as published in the City Record.



   e.   Opportunity for and consideration of agency and public comment.
The agency shall provide the public an opportunity to comment on the proposed
rule (i) through outreach to the discrete regulated community or communities,
if one exists, provided that this clause shall not be construed to create a
private right of action to enforce this requirement; (ii) through submission
of written data, views, or arguments, and (iii) at a public hearing unless it
is determined by the agency in writing, which shall be published in the
notice of proposed rulemaking in the City Record, that such a public hearing
on a proposed rule would serve no public purpose. All written comments and a
summary of oral comments concerning a proposed rule received from the public
or any agency shall be placed in a public record and be made readily
available to the public as soon as practicable and in any event within a
reasonable time, not to be delayed because of the continued pendency of
consideration of the proposed rule. After consideration of the relevant
comments presented, the agency may adopt a final rule pursuant to subdivision
f of this section; except that, other than a rule adopted pursuant to
subdivision i of this section, no final rule shall be adopted by such board
or commission unless its final language is posted in a prominent location on
such agency's website and electronically transmitted to each member of such
board or commission at least three calendar days, exclusive of Sundays, prior
to such rule's adoption; provided, however, that revisions may be made to a
final rule posted online and sent electronically in conformity with this
subdivision at any time prior to the vote on such rule if such revisions are
approved by all members of such board or commission by unanimous consent.
Such final rule may include revisions of the proposed rule, and such adoption
of revisions based on the consideration of relevant agency or public comments
shall not require further notice and comment pursuant to this section. This
paragraph shall not be construed to create a private right of action to
enforce its provisions. Inadvertent failure to comply with this paragraph
shall not result in the invalidation of any rule.



   f.   Effective date.



      1.   No rule shall be effective until



         (a)   the rule is filed by the agency with the
corporation counsel for publication in the Compilation,



         (b)   the rule and a statement of basis and purpose is
transmitted to the council for its information, and



         (c)   the rule and a statement of basis and purpose have
been published in the City Record and thirty days have elapsed after such
publication. The requirement that thirty days shall first elapse after such
publication shall not apply where a finding that a substantial need for the
earlier implementation of a program or policy has been made by the agency in
writing and has been approved by the mayor prior to the effective date of the
rule and such finding and approval is contained in the notice.



      2.   A rule shall be void if it is not published in the next
supplement to the Compilation in which its publication is practicable;
provided, however, that in the case of an inadvertent failure to publish a
rule in such supplement, the rule shall become effective as of the date of
its publication, if it is published within six months of the date the
corporation counsel receives notice of its omission; and further provided
that any judicial or administrative action or proceeding, whether criminal or
civil, commenced under or by virtue of any provision of a rule voided
pursuant to this section and pending prior to such voidance, may be
prosecuted and defended to final effect in the same manner as they might if
such rule had not been so voided.



   g.   Petition for rules. Any person may petition an agency to
consider the adoption of any rule. Within sixty days after the submission of
a petition, the agency shall either deny such petition in writing, stating
the reasons for denial, or state the agency's intention to initiate
rulemaking, by a specified date, concerning the subject of such petition.
Each agency shall prescribe by rule the procedure for submission,
consideration and disposition of such petitions. In the case of a board,
commission or other body that is not headed by a single person, such rules of
procedure may authorize such body to delegate to its chair the authority to
reject such petitions. Such decision shall be within the discretion of the
agency and shall not be subject to judicial review.



   h.   Maintenance of comments. Each agency shall establish a system
for maintaining and making available for public inspection all written
comments received in response to each notice of rulemaking.



   i.   Emergency procedures.



      1.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, an
agency may adopt a rule prior to the notice and comment otherwise required by
this section if the immediate effectiveness of such rule is necessary to
address an imminent threat to health, safety, property or a necessary
service. A finding of such imminent threat and the specific reasons for the
finding must be made in writing by the agency adopting such rule and shall be
approved by the mayor before such rule may be made effective. In the event
that an elected official other than the mayor has the authority to promulgate
rules, such official may make such findings without prior mayoral approval.
The rule and accompanying finding shall be made public forthwith and shall be
published in the City Record as soon as practicable. Agencies shall also
electronically transmit all emergency rules adopted pursuant to this
paragraph to the office of the speaker of the council, the council's office
of legislative documents, the corporation counsel, each council member, the
chairs of all community boards, the news media and civic organizations, as
such term is defined in subdivision b of this section, no later than the date
the emergency rules are transmitted to the City Record for publication
pursuant to this paragraph.



      2.   A rule adopted on an emergency basis shall not remain in
effect for longer than sixty days unless the agency has initiated notice and
comment otherwise required by this section within such sixty day period and
publishes with such notice a statement that an extension of such rule on an
emergency basis is necessary for an additional sixty days to afford an
opportunity for notice and comment and to adopt a final rule as required by
this section; provided that no further such finding of an emergency may be
made with respect to the same or a substantially similar rule.



Section 1044. Review of previously adopted rules.



   a.   Submission of previously adopted rules.



      1.   By the tenth day of August, nineteen hundred eighty-nine,
each agency shall send to the corporation counsel a copy of each rule, as
defined in subdivision five of section one thousand forty-one, in force as of
the first day of January of nineteen hundred eighty-nine. Each such rule
shall be identified by the agency as one of the following:



         (a)   a rule which should be continued in its present
form;



         (b)   a rule which should be continued with amendments;
or



         (c)   a rule which should be repealed.



      2.   Any amendment or repeal of a rule described in paragraph
one of this subdivision, shall be subject to the provisions set forth in
section one thousand forty-three.



   b.   In regard to all rules submitted pursuant to subdivision a of
this section, the corporation counsel shall



      1.   include such rules in the Compilation required to be
published pursuant to section one thousand forty-five; provided, however,
that each rule which the agency identifies as a rule which should be
continued but with amendments, and each rule which the agency identifies as a
rule which should be repealed, shall be published in the Compilation with an
appropriate notation as to the agency's comments and intentions. Such
notations shall be provided for informational purposes only and such rule in
its present form shall remain in full force and effect until and unless such
rule is amended or repealed pursuant to the procedures set forth in section
one thousand forty-three, and



      2.   submit to the City Record for publication by the first
day of September, nineteen hundred ninety, a list of rules submitted pursuant
to subdivisions a and e of this section, except for rules contained in the
health code. Such list shall include for each rule a short descriptive title,
as well as any available identifying names, numbers, adoption dates or
similar information regarding such rule; and an indication of the agency's
intention to continue such rule without amendments, to continue it with
amendments or to repeal it.



   c.   No rule, as defined in subdivision five of section one thousand
forty-one, which is in force as of the first day of January, nineteen hundred
eighty-nine shall have any force or effect on or after the tenth day of
August, nineteen hundred and eighty-nine unless it is submitted by the agency
to the corporation counsel by such date.



   d.   Except as provided in subdivision e, no rule adopted by any
agency prior to the effective date of this chapter shall have any force or
effect after the first day of July, nineteen hundred ninety-one unless it is
included in the Compilation required to be published by that date pursuant to
section one thousand forty-five; provided however that in the case of an
inadvertent failure to publish a rule in such Compilation, the rule shall
become effective as of the date of its publication, if it is published within
six months from the date the corporation counsel received notice of its
omission, and further provided that any judicial or administrative action or
proceeding, whether criminal or civil, commenced under or by virtue of any
provision of a rule voided pursuant to this section and pending prior to such
voidance, may be prosecuted and defended to final effect in the same manner
as they might if such rule had not been so voided.



   e.   On or before a date one hundred eighty days after the
publication date of the Compilation required to be published pursuant to
section one thousand forty-five, any person may submit to the agency involved
a copy or a description of a rule which such person believes to be in force
as of the effective date of this chapter. Upon the receipt of a description
or copy of such a rule, the agency shall endeavor to verify the existence of
such rule and upon identifying such rule, if such rule was in force and
effect as of the effective date of this chapter and has not been submitted to
the corporation counsel pursuant to subdivision a of this section, the agency
shall take the actions required pursuant to subdivision a of this section,
and notwithstanding the provisions of subdivisions c and d of this section,
such rule shall remain in force and effect until or unless amended or
repealed pursuant to section one thousand forty-three.



Section 1045. Compilation of city rules.



   a.   The corporation counsel shall publish a Compilation of city
rules and thereafter keep such Compilation up to date through supplements
issued at least every six months and at such other times as the corporation
counsel shall determine. The Compilation and its supplements shall be
certified by the corporation counsel and shall include every rule currently
in effect. The Compilation and its supplements may contain such other
information as the corporation counsel deems necessary and appropriate for
full understanding of any rule or which the corporation counsel in his or her
discretion determines may be of interest or assistance to the public. The
Compilation and its supplements shall be organized by agency and indexed by
subject matter. An indexed edition of the Compilation shall be published by
the first day of July, nineteen hundred and ninty-one, which date shall be
deemed the publication date of the Compilation, and shall be updated and
republished by the first day of March of every fourth year thereafter.



   b.   The rules contained within the Compilation and its supplements
shall be certified by the corporation counsel and shall be the rules of the
city unless added to, amended or repealed in accordance with section ten
hundred forty-three of the charter. Materials included in the Compilation may
be edited, rearranged and updated for clarity, accuracy and reorganization
without change in substance. Section numbers, stylistic and organizational
formats and other non-substantive revisions to the rules effected by the law
department pursuant to this subdivision shall become effective on the
publication date of the Compilation and upon the publication of each
supplement.



   c.   Documents submitted by an agency pursuant to subdivision a of
section ten hundred forty-four of the charter which were not formally adopted
by the agency as rules pursuant to section eleven hundred five of the charter
as in effect prior to November eighth, nineteen hundred eighty-eight shall
either be included in the Compilation or filed in the municipal reference and
research center in the manner provided below. All documents which the
corporation counsel, in his or her discretion, determines should not be
included in the Compilation shall be organized by agency and subject matter
in a form which shall be easily accessible to the public and filed by the
corporation counsel in the municipal reference and research center on or
prior to July first nineteen hundred ninety-one. Notice of such filing and a
list of the documents filed shall be published in the City Record.
Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of section ten hundred forty-four
of the charter, any of such documents so filed shall, if otherwise valid,
continue to be effective provided, however, that the amendment or repeal of
any document which is within the definition of rule set forth in subdivision
five of section ten hundred forty-one of the charter shall be in accordance
with section ten hundred forty-three of the charter.



Section 1046. Adjudication.



    Where any agency is authorized to conduct an adjudication, it shall
act, at a minimum, in accordance with the provisions set forth below. The
parking violations bureau shall not be subject to the requirements of this
section.



   a.   Notice. All parties shall be given reasonable notice of such
hearing, which shall include:



      1.   a statement of the nature of the proceeding and the time
and place it will be held, if applicable;



      2.   a statement of the legal authority and jurisdiction under
which the hearing is to be held, and a reference to the particular sections
of the law and rules involved; and



      3.   a short and plain statement of the matters to be
adjudicated, including reference to the particular sections of law and rule
involved.



   b.   Notice of agency procedures. Agencies shall adopt rules
governing agency procedures for adjudications and appeals. Agencies shall
make a copy of any such rule available, upon request, to any party who has
received notice of violation of the laws, rules or orders enforced by the
agency.



   c.   Hearing.



      1.   All parties shall be afforded an opportunity for a
hearing within a reasonable time. At the hearing the parties shall be
afforded due process of law, including the opportunity to be represented by
counsel, to issue subpoenas or request that a subpoena be issued, to call
witnesses, to cross-examine opposing witnesses and to present oral and
written arguments on the law and facts. Adherence to formal rules of evidence
is not required. No ex parte communications relating to other than
ministerial matters regarding a proceeding shall be received by a hearing
officer, including internal agency directives not published as rules.



      2.   Findings of fact shall be based exclusively on the record
of the proceeding as a whole. Except as otherwise provided for by state or
local law, the party commencing the adjudication shall have the burden of
proof.



      3.   The hearing shall be transcribed or recorded and a copy
of the transcript or record, or any part thereof, shall be made available to
any party to the hearing upon request therefor. A typed or recorded copy of
such transcript shall be provided upon request for a reasonable cost.



   d.   Informal disposition. Unless precluded by law, informal
disposition may be made of any matter which is the subject of an adjudication
by methods of alternative dispute resolution, stipulation, agreed settlement,
or consent order.



   e.   Hearing officer. Except as otherwise provided for by this
charter the person presiding at a hearing shall be assigned solely to
adjudicative and related duties. Except as otherwise provided for by the
rules of the agency or by order of the mayor issued in accordance with
subdivisions two and three of section one thousand forty-eight, such hearing
officer shall make final findings of fact and shall not make any final
decision, determination, or order, but shall only recommend such, and shall
forward such recommendation and the record of the adjudication to the agency,
who may adopt, reject or modify any such recommended decision, determination
or order.



   f.   Recommendation or decision. Any recommended decision, final
decision, determination or order shall be in writing, or stated in the record
if the parties are present, and shall include findings of fact and
conclusions of law. A copy of any written recommended decision, final
decision, determination, or order shall be delivered or mailed forthwith to
each party.



Section 1047. Declaratory ruling.



   On the written petition of any person, an agency may issue a written
declaratory ruling on the applicability of any rule adopted by it, to any
person, property, or state of facts. A declaratory ruling shall be binding
only with respect to the person who makes the petition and only with respect
to the stated facts contained in the petition.



Chapter 45-A: Office of Administrative Trials and Hearings



Section 1048. Office.



   1.   There shall be an office of administrative trials and hearings
which shall conduct adjudicatory hearings for all agencies of the city unless
otherwise provided for by executive order, rule, law or pursuant to
collective bargaining agreements. The office shall be directed by the chief
administrative law judge, who shall be an attorney admitted to practice for
at least five years in the state of New York. The chief administrative law
judge shall be appointed by the mayor.



   2.   Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of law and except as
provided in subdivision five of this section, the mayor shall be authorized
to designate by executive order the office of administrative trials and
hearings as the tribunal for the impartial administration and conduct of
adjudicatory hearings for violations of this charter, the administrative code
of the city of New York, rules promulgated pursuant to this charter or such
code and any other laws, rules, regulations or other policies enforced or
implemented by the agencies of the city through the conduct of adjudications.
Pursuant to any such order, the mayor may transfer entire tribunals or parts
thereof, or categories of adjudications to such office, which may perform
such responsibilities, including responsibilities delegated elsewhere by this
charter or other law, as the mayor shall direct in such order. In furtherance
of any such order, agencies shall be authorized to establish their tribunals,
or parts thereof, within such office. No existing right or remedy of any
character shall be lost, impaired or affected by reason of a transfer of a
tribunal or part thereof or category of adjudications pursuant to this
subdivision except as may be necessary to implement such transfer.



   3.   Any order issued by the mayor pursuant to subdivision two of
this section may include provision for matters pending at the time that any
transfer pursuant to such subdivision shall take effect and may in
appropriate instances deem agency rules in effect on the date of any transfer
to be rules of the office of administrative trials and hearings. Any such
order may in addition address circumstances in which agencies shall continue
to make final findings of fact and/or decisions, determinations or orders.



   4.   (a)    The mayor shall constitute a committee to evaluate
the adjudicatory functions carried out by city agencies and to make
recommendations with respect to the transfers authorized by subdivision two
of this section. Such committee shall be chaired by the deputy mayor for
legal affairs or another designee of the mayor. It shall have representatives
from the office of administrative trials and hearings, the law department,
the department of citywide administrative services and any other agency the
mayor deems necessary to implement the transfers described in this section.
The work of such committee shall be deemed complete upon submission to the
mayor of a final report identifying the tribunals or parts thereof, or
categories of adjudications, that have been consolidated or that should be
considered for future consolidation, provided that the mayor may reconstitute
the committee at any time to perform the functions described in this section.



      (b)   Before recommending transfers of tribunals or parts
thereof, or of categories of adjudications, the committee shall solicit
comments from the public, including, to the extent practicable, any segments
of the public particularly affected by such transfers. In furtherance of such
solicitation, the committee or a person or agency designated by the committee
shall hold a public hearing, on notice of at least twenty days published in
the City Record. Such notice shall specify the transfers that are under
consideration by the committee for recommendation to the mayor.



      (c)   The authority conferred upon the mayor by subdivisions
two and three of this section shall not be limited by or contingent upon the
requirements of this subdivision.



   5.   Subdivisions two through four of this section shall not apply
to the office of administrative tax appeals, including the tax commission and
the tax appeals tribunal, or the board of standards and appeals.



   6.   The office of administrative trials and hearings shall issue
monthly reports relating to dismissals of civil penalty violations in
tribunals within the jurisdiction of such office in the previous month. Such
reports shall catalogue dismissals for each agency and shall include the
reason for each dismissal. Such reports shall be sent to the speaker of the
council, the public advocate, the mayor, and to each agency included in the
reports.



(Am. L.L. 2015/064, 6/29/2015, eff. 9/27/2015)



Editor's note: the local law that added division 6. to this Section 1048
shall expire and be deemed repealed on 12/31/2018; see L.L. 2015/064 § 3.



Section 1049. Powers of the chief administrative law judge.



   1.   (a)   The chief administrative law judge shall have
authority to direct the office established pursuant to section one thousand
forty-eight with respect to its management and structure and to appoint a
staff of administrative law judges. Each administrative law judge shall be an
attorney admitted to practice in the state of New York for at least five
years. Each administrative law judge shall be appointed for a term of five
years removable only for cause after notice and opportunity for a hearing on
a record.



      (b)   The provisions of paragraph (a) of this subdivision
relating to terms and qualifications shall not be mandatory with respect to
any administrative law judge or hearing officer transferred from another
agency pursuant to subdivision two of section one thousand forty-eight of
this chapter or assigned to any particular tribunal or part thereof, or
category of adjudications, transferred pursuant to such subdivision that may
be specified by the chief administrative law judge. The chief administrative
law judge may prescribe alternative qualifications and terms and conditions
of employment for any administrative law judges or hearing officers who are
not subject to paragraph (a) of this subdivision.



   2.   (a)   The chief administrative law judge shall establish
rules for the conduct of hearings, in accordance with the requirements of
chapter forty-five of the charter.



      (b)   In conjunction with the mayor and in accordance with the
requirements of section thirteen-a of the charter, the chief administrative
law judge shall promulgate and may from time to time amend rules establishing
a code or codes of professional conduct governing the activities of all
administrative law judges and hearing officers in city tribunals.



   3.   In the conduct of an adjudication, an administrative law judge
may:



      (a)   hold conferences for the settlement or simplification of
the issues;



      (b)   administer oaths and affirmations, examine witnesses,
rule upon offers of proof, receive evidence, and oversee and regulate
discovery procedures;



      (c)   upon the request of an agency or any party, or upon the
administrative law judge's own volition, subpoena the attendance of witnesses
and the production of books, records, or other information;



      (d)   regulate the course of the hearing in accordance with
agency rules and chapter forty-five of the charter, provided that if agency
rules are silent as to a particular matter, the rules of the office of
administrative trials and hearings shall apply;



      (e)   dispose of procedural requests or similar matters;



      (f)   make recommended or final findings of fact or decisions,
determinations or orders, as authorized by law;



      (g)   take any other action authorized by law or agency rule
consistent therewith.



   4.   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, in the conduct of
an adjudication relating to a natural person accused of committing a
specified violation, as defined in paragraph (b) of this subdivision, an
administrative law judge or a hearing officer shall offer the respondent the
option to perform community service in lieu of a monetary civil penalty.



      (a)   For purposes of this section, the term "community
service" means performing services for a public or not-for-profit
corporation, association, institution, or agency in lieu of payment of a
monetary civil penalty. Such services may include, but are not limited to,
attendance at programs, either in person or web-based, designed to benefit,
improve, or educate either the community or the respondent.



      (b)   For purposes of this section, the term "specified
violation" means a violation of: subparagraph (i) of paragraph 9 of
subdivision a of section 533; section 10-125 of the administrative code;
subdivision 1 of section 16-118 of the administrative code; subdivision 6 of
section 16-118 of the administrative code, with respect to the act of public
urination; section 18-146 of the administrative code, excluding paragraphs 2,
3, 21, 23, and 24 of subdivision c; or subdivision (a) of section 24-218 of
the administrative code. Specified violations shall not include violations
arising during the course of conducting any commercial activity or violations
arising from any activity carried out for a commercial purpose, except that a
violation of paragraph 15 of section 18-146 of the administrative code is a
specified violation, regardless of whether such violation arose during the
course of conducting a commercial activity or from an activity carried out
for a commercial purpose.



      (c)   The option to perform community service shall not
require the payment of any fee by the respondent.



      (d)   The performance of community service offered pursuant to
this subdivision shall not result in the displacement of employed workers or
in the impairment of existing contracts for services, nor shall the
performance of any such services be required or permitted in any
establishment involved in any labor strike or lockout.



      (e)   An administrative law judge or a hearing officer shall
offer up to seven hours of community service in lieu of payment of a civil
penalty in an amount up to 300 dollars. Fractional and multiple hours of
service shall be offered for civil penalties that are less than, and greater
than, 300 dollars, respectively.



      (f)   If a respondent accepts the option to perform community
service and an administrative law judge or hearing officer finds that the
respondent has failed to perform such services within the time prescribed, an
administrative law judge or hearing officer shall issue an order reinstating
the applicable civil penalty and, if otherwise authorized by law, such order
shall constitute a judgment which may be entered and enforced without court
proceedings in the same manner as the enforcement of money judgments entered
in civil actions.



      (g)   The office of administrative trials and hearings shall
promulgate any rules as may be necessary for the purposes of carrying out the
provisions of this subdivision, which shall include, but not be limited to,
rules specifying the correspondence between the amount of service that shall
be offered and the amount of civil penalties imposed.



   5.   During the course of an adjudication and upon the request of an
agency or any party, or upon the administrative law judge's or hearing
officer's own initiative, an administrative law judge or hearing officer may
dismiss a notice of violation for a specified violation, as defined by
paragraph (b) of subdivision 4 of this section, when dismissal is appropriate
in the interest of justice, within the meaning of this subdivision.



      (a)   An administrative law judge or hearing officer may
dismiss a notice of violation in the interest of justice when, even though
there may be no basis for dismissal as a matter of law, such dismissal is
appropriate as a matter of discretion due to the existence of one or more
compelling factors, considerations, or circumstances clearly demonstrating
that finding the respondent in violation of the provision at issue would
constitute or result in injustice. In determining whether such compelling
factor, consideration, or circumstance exists, the administrative law judge
or hearing officer must, to the extent applicable, examine and consider,
individually and collectively, the following:



         (i)   the seriousness and circumstances of the violation;



         (ii)   the extent of harm caused by the violation;



         (iii)   the evidence supporting or refuting the
violation charged, whether admissible or inadmissible at a hearing;



         (iv)   the history, character, and condition of the
respondent;



         (v)   the purpose and effect of imposing upon the
respondent a civil penalty authorized by one of the provisions listed in this
section;



         (vi)   the impact of a dismissal on the safety or
welfare of the community;



         (vii)   the impact of a dismissal upon the confidence of
the public in the office of administrative trials and hearings and in the
implementation of laws by the city of New York;



         (viii)   the position of the relevant city agency
regarding the proposed dismissal with reference to the specific circumstances
of the respondent and the violation charged; and



         (ix)   any other relevant fact indicating that a
decision to sustain the alleged violation would or would not serve a useful
purpose.



      (b)   The administrative law judge or hearing officer's
determination shall be limited to a consideration of the factors described in
paragraph (a), and shall not include a consideration of the administrative
law judge or hearing officer's judgment as to whether, as a matter of policy,
certain conduct should be prohibited.



      (c)   Upon dismissing a violation in the interest of justice,
the administrative law judge or hearing officer must set forth the reasons
therefor upon the record.



   6.   No later than 20 days after the quarter ending June 30, 2017,
and no later than 20 days after the end of each quarter thereafter, the chief
administrative law judge shall submit to the council and the mayor, and post
to the office of administrative trial and hearing's website a report
regarding adjudications for specified violations, as defined by paragraph (b)
of subdivision 4 of this section, during the prior quarter. Such report shall
contain the number and percentage of such adjudications, in total and
disaggregated by violation, in which:



      (a)   the respondent appeared, in total and disaggregated by
whether such appearance was made in person or by another method;



      (b)   the respondent accepted the option to perform community
service pursuant to subdivision 4 of this section, in total and disaggregated
by whether such service was performed;



      (c)   a pre-adjudication withdrawal was made by the agency;



      (d)   a decision was rendered after a hearing;



      (e)   a civil penalty was ordered, disaggregated by numerical
ranges of penalty amounts;



      (f)   the violation was dismissed;



      (g)   the violation was dismissed in the interest of justice
pursuant to subdivision 5 of this section;



      (h)   the respondent paid the civil penalties imposed, in
whole or in part; and



      (i)   a default judgment was ordered due to the respondent's
failure to appear for a hearing.



   7.   The chief administrative law judge shall conduct a yearly
evaluation of penalties and judgments imposed for specified violations, as
defined by paragraph (b) of subdivision 4 of this section. Such evaluation
shall examine the amount of penalties and judgments accrued by natural
persons for such specified violations both in total and during the previous
year. A summary of this evaluation shall be provided to the council and the
mayor within 45 days of the end of each year. Such summary shall include, but
not be limited to, the number of natural persons who have accrued civil
penalties and judgments in amounts higher than 500 dollars, 750 dollars, 1000
dollars, and 2000 dollars, both in total and during the previous year, for
specified violations. Such summary shall additionally include the chief
administrative law judge’s recommendation as to whether, based upon the
chief administrative law judge’s evaluation, a limit should be enacted by
local law on the civil penalties and judgments that may be imposed for
specified violations upon a natural person within a particular period of
time. This recommendation shall take into account whether the amount of civil
penalties or community service imposed for the specified violations on
certain natural persons is disproportionate to the harm caused by such
specified violations and shall additionally include the chief administrative
law judge’s recommendations for which specified violations, if any, should
be subject to a limit and the dollar amount of such limit, if any.



(Am. L.L. 2016/073, 6/13/2016, eff. 6/13/2017 [part])



Section 1049-a. Environmental control board.



   a.   There shall be in the office of administrative trials and
hearings an environmental control board consisting of the commissioner of
environmental protection, the commissioner of sanitation, the commissioner of
buildings, the commissioner of health and mental hygiene, the police
commissioner, the fire commissioner and the chief administrative law judge of
the office of administrative trials and hearings, who shall be chair, all of
whom shall serve on the board without compensation and all of whom shall have
the power to exercise or delegate any of their functions, powers and duties
as members of the board, and six persons to be appointed by the mayor, with
the advice and consent of the city council, who are not otherwise employed by
the city, one to be possessed of a broad general background and experience in
the field of air pollution control, one with such background and experience
in the field of water pollution control, one with such background and
experience in the field of noise pollution control, one with such background
and experience in the real estate field, one with such background and
experience in the business community, and one member of the public, and who
shall serve for four-year terms. Such members shall be compensated at a rate
that may be specified by the chair and approved by the mayor. Within the
board's appropriation, the chair may appoint an executive director, subject
to the approval of the board, and such hearing officers, including
non-salaried hearing officers, and other employees as the chair may from time
to time find necessary for the proper performance of the board's duties. The
board shall be convened by the chairperson or in his or her absence a deputy
commissioner of the office of administrative trials and hearings or at the
request of any three members thereof. Five members of the board, at least two
of whom shall not be city officials, shall constitute a quorum.



   b.   The environmental control board may adopt and amend regulations
not inconsistent with any provision of law:



      (1)   regulating or prohibiting the emission into the open air
from any source, whether fixed or movable, and whether on land or waters of
any harmful or objectionable substances including, but not limited to, smoke,
soot, dust, fumes, flyash, gas vapors and odors, and the installation,
construction or alteration of equipment giving forth such emissions into the
open air insofar as such emissions are effected thereby; and



      (2)   regulating or prohibiting the emission into the waters
within and about the city of New York from any source whether fixed or
movable and whether on land or water of any harmful or objectionable
substances, contaminants and pollutants.



   b-1.   The environmental control board shall promulgate rules or
regulations not inconsistent with any provision of law:



      (1)   providing that appropriate language assistance services
are afforded respondents whose primary languages are not English to assist
such respondents in communicating meaningfully with hearing officers;    



      (2)   (a)   providing that if a notice of violation sets
forth a specific hearing date and hearing office and the respondent timely
appears on such date at such office pursuant to that notice of violation,
then the hearing officer may exercise his or her discretion to adjourn the
hearing only: (i) if a representative of the petitioning agency appears at
the hearing; (ii) if, due to extraordinary circumstances, a representative of
the petitioning agency is not present at the hearing; or (iii) if the
respondent consents to the adjournment;



         (b)   notwithstanding any other provision of this
charter, for the purpose of making an appearance under this paragraph, any
city agency that issues notices of violations returnable to the environmental
control board may delegate authority to appear on its behalf to any
representative authorized to appear on behalf of any other city agency that
issues notices of violation returnable to the environmental control board; and



      (3)   providing that if (i) a hearing has been adjourned by a
hearing officer solely for the purpose of obtaining the presence and
testimony of the officer of the petitioning agency who issued the subject
notice of violation, (ii) the respondent timely appears on the adjourned
hearing date, and (iii) such officer of such agency fails to timely appear on
the adjourned hearing date, then the hearing shall not be further adjourned
solely to obtain the presence and testimony of such officer of such agency,
unless the respondent consents to the adjournment or the hearing officer
determines that extraordinary circumstances warrant the adjournment.



   c.   (1)   The environmental control board shall enforce the
provisions of the charter and the administrative code, and any rules and
regulations made thereunder, which relate to:



         (a)   the cleanliness of the streets;



         (b)   the disposal of wastes;



         (c)   the provision of a pure, wholesome and adequate
supply of water;



         (d)   the prevention of air, water and noise pollution;



         (e)   the regulation of street peddling;



         (f)   the prevention of fire and danger to life and
property therefrom which are within the jurisdiction of the fire department
and which the fire commissioner shall designate by rule or regulation;



         (g)   the construction, alteration, maintenance, use,
occupancy, safety, sanitary condition, mechanical equipment and inspection of
buildings or structures and the regulation, inspection and testing of wiring
and appliances for electric light, heat and power in or on buildings or
structures in the city which are within the jurisdiction of the department of
buildings or the department of small business services and which the
commissioner of buildings or the commissioner of small business services
shall designate by rule or regulation;



         (h)   the response to emergencies caused by releases or
threatened releases of hazardous substances;



         (i)   the use and regulation of all property subject to
the jurisdiction of the department of parks and recreation;



         (j)   the reporting of information relating to the
amount, location and nature of hazardous substances, and the labeling of
hazardous substances;



         (k)   the construction, maintenance and repair and
obstruction or closure of public roads, streets, highways, parkways, bridges
and tunnels which are within the jurisdiction of the department of
transportation and the department of information technology and
telecommunications;



         (l)   the use and regulation of all property subject to
the jurisdiction of the department of small business services;



         (m)   the defacement of property; and



         (n)   landmarks and historic districts within the
jurisdiction of the landmarks preservation commission.



      (2)   The board shall have concurrent jurisdiction with the
board of health to enforce those provisions of the health code and the rules
and regulations relating thereto which the board of health shall designate.



      (3)   The board shall have authority from time to time to
make, amend and rescind such rules and regulations as may be necessary to
carry out its duties under this subdivision.



   d.   (1)   (a)   The environmental control board shall conduct
proceedings for the adjudication of violations of the laws, rules and
regulations enforced by it pursuant to the provisions of subdivision c of
this section or of any other law providing for enforcement by the
environmental control board in accordance with this paragraph (1) and with
rules and regulations promulgated by the board, and shall have the power to
render decisions and orders and to impose the civil penalties provided under
law for such violations.



         (b)   The form and wording of notices of violation shall
be prescribed by the board. A notice of violation or copy thereof when filled
in and served shall constitute notice of the violation charged, and, if sworn
to or affirmed, shall be prima facie evidence of the facts contained therein.
A notice of violation shall be deemed to include a civil summons or a summons
for a civil violation.



            (i)   Where a violation is alleged to have
occurred in or on a building or lot, a notice of violation shall additionally
include, to the extent practicable, the borough, block and lot number,
building identification number or device identification number, as
applicable, associated with any such building or lot. The board shall not
dismiss such notice of violation on the ground that it fails to include such
borough, block and lot number, building identification number or device
identification number.



            (ii)   An agency that issues a notice of violation
that generically cites the "owner of" a business, organization or premises as
the respondent shall make, within 30 days of issuing such a notice of
violation, reasonable efforts to learn the respondent's name. If at any time
such agency learns the respondent's name, such agency shall correct the
notice of violation to reflect the respondent's name, mail the corrected
notice of violation to the respondent and provide the corrected notice of
violation to the board.



            (iii)   Notwithstanding clause (ii) of this
subparagraph, the board shall construe a notice of violation that generically
cites the "owner of" a business, organization or premises as if such notice
of violation included the name of the owner of such business, organization or
premises and shall not dismiss such notice of violation on the ground that it
fails to include the respondent's name. This subparagraph does not limit any
right a respondent has to request a new hearing on the ground that the notice
of violation was not properly served.



            (iv)   A notice of violation shall include a
written warning that states: "If the Environmental Control Board or the
Office of Administrative Trials and Hearings orders you to pay a civil
penalty, failure to pay that penalty in a timely manner could lead to the
denial of an application for a license, permit or registration, or to the
suspension, termination or revocation of a license, permit or registration
issued to you by a city agency."



         (c)   The notice of violation shall contain information
advising the person charged of the manner and the time in which such person
may either admit or deny the violation charged in the notice. Such notice of
violation shall also contain a warning to advise the person charged that
failure to plead in the manner and time stated in the notice may result in a
default decision and order being entered against such person. The original or
a copy of the notice of violation shall be filed and retained by the board
and shall be deemed a record kept in the ordinary course of business.



         (d)   (i)   Where a respondent has failed to plead
within the time allowed by the rules of the board or has failed to appear on
a designated hearing date or a subsequent date following an adjournment, such
failure to plead or appear shall be deemed, for all purposes, to be an
admission of liability and shall be grounds for rendering a default decision
and order imposing a penalty in the maximum amount prescribed under law for
the violation charged.



            (ii)   Where a default decision is rendered on a
notice of violation that generically cites the "owner of" a business,
organization or premises as the respondent and such decision is referred to
the department of finance for collection efforts, the commissioner of finance
shall make, within 90 days of such referral, reasonable efforts to learn the
respondent's name. If such commissioner learns the respondent's name, such
commissioner shall mail a copy of the default decision to the respondent at
such respondent's last known residence, business address or both.



         (e)   Where a proceeding has been referred by the board
to a hearing officer, upon the failure of any party to respond properly to a
lawful discovery order or request made pursuant to rules of the board
governing discovery, or upon any party's wrongful refusal to answer questions
or produce documents, the hearing officer may take whatever action he or she
deems appropriate including, but not limited to, preclusion of evidence or
witnesses, or striking the pleadings or defenses of such party. It shall not
be necessary for a party to have been subpoenaed to appear or produce
documents at any properly ordered discovery proceeding for such sanctions to
be applicable.



         (f)   Where the rules of the board permit exceptions to
be filed with the board from a recommended decision and order issued pursuant
to this subdivision and such exceptions are filed pursuant to the rules of
the board, if no final decision and order has been issued by the board to the
parties after the expiration of one hundred eighty days from the filing of
the exceptions, a respondent who filed such exceptions may seek, at any time
after the expiration of the one hundred eighty days, judicial review pursuant
to article seventy-eight of the New York civil practice law and rules, and if
a respondent does so, the recommended decision and order issued pursuant to
this subdivision shall be deemed the final decision and order of the board,
provided that no respondent may rely upon this subparagraph to have a
recommended decision and order deemed a final decision and order of the board
unless: (i) at least forty-five days before the filing of any petition
pursuant to article seventy-eight of the New York civil practice law and
rules, such respondent shall have filed with the board written notice,
pursuant to its rules, of the respondent's intention to file such petition;
and (ii) such respondent has served such petition on the board pursuant to
the New York civil practice law and rules. The board may issue a final
decision and order at any time after the respondent has filed with the board
written notice of his or her intention to file such petition, provided that
the respondent has not filed such petition on a day prior to the board's
issuance of its final decision.



         (g)   Any final order of the board imposing a civil
penalty, whether the adjudication was had by hearing or upon default or
otherwise, shall constitute a judgment rendered by the board which may be
entered in the civil court of the city of New York or any other place
provided for the entry of civil judgments within the state, and may be
enforced without court proceedings in the same manner as the enforcement of
money judgments entered in civil actions; provided, however, that no such
judgment shall be entered which exceeds the sum of twenty-five thousand
dollars for each respondent.



         (h)   Notwithstanding the foregoing provision, before a
judgment based upon a default may be so entered the board must have notified
the respondent by first class mail in such form as the board may direct: (i)
of the default decision and order and the penalty imposed; (ii) that a
judgment will be entered in the civil court of the city of New York or any
other place provided for the entry of civil judgments within the state of New
York; and (iii) that entry of such judgment may be avoided by requesting a
stay of default for good cause shown and either requesting a hearing or
entering a plea pursuant to the rules of the board within thirty days of the
mailing of such notice.



         (i)   A judgment entered pursuant to this paragraph
shall remain in full force and effect for eight years.



         (j)   The board shall develop and implement technology
to enable electronic case management, including but not limited to: online
adjudication and payments in appropriate cases; more efficient administration
of case conferences, hearings and appeals; electronic case scheduling; and
generation of data and other reports to enhance the efficiency and increase
public accountability of board adjudication functions. Not later than
December 1, 2008, the board shall report to the city council on its plans and
progress in fulfilling the requirements of this subparagraph and shall
include in its report a projected schedule for implementation.



      (2)   (a)   The environmental control board shall not enter
any final decision or order pursuant to the provisions of paragraph one of
this subdivision unless the notice of violation shall have been served in the
same manner as is prescribed for service of process by article three of the
civil practice law and rules or article three of the business corporation
law, except that:



            (i)   service of a notice of violation of any
provisions of the charter or administrative code the enforcement of which is
the responsibility of the fire commissioner, the commissioner of buildings,
the commissioner of environmental protection, the commissioner of
transportation, the commissioner of small business services, the landmarks
preservation commission or the commissioner of the department of information
technology and telecommunications and over which the environmental control
board has jurisdiction, may be made by delivering such notice to a person
employed by the respondent on or in connection with the premises where the
violation occurred, provided however, that the department of buildings and
the fire department may not utilize the procedures set forth in this item to
serve a notice of violation relating to commercial premises or residential
premises with a legal occupancy of four or more dwelling units; and



            (ii)   service of a notice of violation of any
provision of the charter or administrative code, the enforcement of which is
the responsibility of the commissioner of sanitation, the commissioner of
buildings or the commissioner of the fire department and over which the
environmental control board has jurisdiction, may be made by affixing such
notice in a conspicuous place to the premises where the violation occurred;
and



            (iii)   service of a notice of violation of any
provision of the administrative code relating to the prevention of noise
pollution caused by an audible motor vehicle burglar alarm and over which the
environmental control board has jurisdiction may be served upon the owner of
a motor vehicle by affixing such notice to said vehicle in a conspicuous
place; and



            (iv)   service of a notice of violation of any of
the provisions of section 10-119 or 10-120 of the administrative code of the
city of New York and over which the environmental control board has
jurisdiction, may be made by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the
respondent's last known residence or business address, provided that delivery
of such notice shall be restricted to the respondent. Service by certified
mail shall be deemed complete upon mailing of the notice of violation unless
the notice of violation is returned to the sender by the United States postal
service for any reason other than refusal of delivery.



         (b)   Such notice may only be affixed or delivered
pursuant to items (i) and (ii) of subparagraph (a) of this paragraph where a
reasonable attempt has been made to deliver such notice to a person in such
premises upon whom service may be made as provided for by article three of
the civil practice law and rules or article three of the business corporation
law. When a copy of such notice has been affixed or delivered, pursuant to
items (i) and (ii) of subparagraph (a) of this paragraph, a copy shall be
mailed to the respondent at the address of such premises. In addition to the
foregoing mailing, if the respondent is neither the owner nor the managing
agent nor the occupying tenant of such premises, then a copy of the notice
shall also be mailed to the respondent at such respondent's last known
residence or business address, and, if the respondent is the owner or agent
of the building with respect to which such notice was issued and the identity
of and an address for such person is contained in any of the files specified
in items (i), (ii) and (iii) of this subparagraph, a copy of the notice shall
also be mailed:



            (i)   to the person registered with the department
of housing preservation and development as the owner or agent of the
premises, at the address filed with such department in compliance with
article two of subchapter four of chapter two of title twenty-seven of the
administrative code; or



            (ii)   to the person designated as owner or agent
of the building or designated to receive real property tax or water bills for
the building at the address for such person contained in one of the files
compiled by the department of finance for the purpose of the assessment or
collection of real property taxes and water charges or in the file compiled
by the department of finance from real property transfer forms filed with the
city register upon the sale or transfer of real property; or



            (iii)   to the person described as owner or agent
of the premises, at the address for such person contained in the files of the
agency which issued such notice of violation compiled and maintained for the
purpose of the enforcement of the provisions of the charter or administrative
code or other law over which such agency has jurisdiction.



         (c)   Proof of such service made pursuant to item (i) or
(ii) of subparagraph (a) of this paragraph and subparagraph (b) of this
paragraph shall be filed with the environmental control board within twenty
days; service shall be complete ten days after such filing.



      (3)   The environmental control board may apply to a court of
competent jurisdiction for enforcement of any other decision or order issued
by such board or of any subpoena issued by such board.



(Am. L.L. 2015/038, 5/6/2015, eff. 5/6/2016; Am. L.L. 2016/046, 4/21/2016,
eff. 10/18/2016; Am. L.L. 2016/047, 4/21/2016, eff. 10/18/2016; Am. L.L.
2016/048, 4/21/2016, eff. 10/18/2016)



Section 1049-b. Effect of non-payment of civil penalties imposed by the
environmental control board or a tribunal of the office of administrative
trials and hearings.



   a.   To the extent an agency issues licenses, permits or
registrations, and such agency issues notices of violation returnable to the
environmental control board or to a tribunal of the office of administrative
trials and hearings, such agency may deny an application for any license,
permit or registration, or an application for renewal of any license, permit
or registration, and may suspend, terminate or revoke any license, permit or
registration, based on the failure to timely pay civil penalties imposed by
the environmental control board or a tribunal of the office of administrative
trials and hearings by such applicant, licensee, permittee or registrant.



   b.   Any agency that issues notices of violation returnable to the
environmental control board or to a tribunal of the office of administrative
trials and hearings shall promulgate rules to implement the authority granted
by subdivision a of this section, except that any such agency that, as of the
effective date of the local law that added this section, has adopted a rule
or policy that substantially meets the requirements of this section shall not
be required to promulgate such rules. Such rules shall include, but need not
be limited to, factors to be considered in an agency's determination whether
to deny, suspend, terminate or revoke, including:



      1.   whether such applicant, licensee, permittee or registrant
has other unpaid penalties, taxes or other debt owed to the city;



      2.   the amount of the unpaid civil penalties imposed by the
environmental control board or a tribunal of the office of administrative
trials and hearings;



      3.   where the violation underlying the unpaid penalties
imposed by the environmental control board or a tribunal of the office of
administrative trials and hearings was issued by such agency, whether such
violation is one of a series of violations returnable to such board or
tribunal and the nature of the underlying violation; and



      4.   whether the unpaid civil penalties imposed by the
environmental control board or a tribunal of the office of administrative
trials and hearings were imposed pursuant to a finding of default that was
subsequently vacated or whether the applicant, licensee, permittee or
registrant has made a request to vacate such default and obtain a new hearing
pursuant to the rules of such board or tribunal.



   c.   An agency's decision whether to exercise the authority granted
by this section shall consider the risk that a denial of an application for a
license, permit or registration, or an application for renewal of any
license, permit or registration or a suspension, termination or revocation of
a license, permit or registration issued by such agency could create an
incentive for applicants, licensees, permittees or registrants to engage in
unlicensed, unpermitted or unregistered activity.



   d.   Nothing in this section shall impair, diminish or otherwise
affect any other authority granted to any agency by any general, special or
local law or any rule promulgated pursuant thereto to deny an application for
a license, permit or registration, or suspend, terminate or revoke a license,
permit or registration.



   e.   No later than September 1, 2017, and every year thereafter, an
agency that exercises the authority granted by subdivision a of this section
shall submit to the city council, and post on its website in a
non-proprietary format that permits automated processing, a report based on
data from the preceding fiscal year that includes:



      1.   the total number of applications for licenses, permits or
registrations received by such agency;



      2.   the total number of applications for licenses, permits or
registrations that were denied pursuant to subdivision a of this section;



      3.   the total number of licenses, permits or registrations
that were suspended, terminated or revoked pursuant to subdivision a of this
section; and



      4.   a list of the types of licenses, permits and
registrations issued by such agency and the time period for which such
licenses, permits and registrations are issued.



(L.L. 2016/047, 4/21/2016, eff. 10/18/2016)



Chapter 46: Elections and Voter Assistance



Section 1051. Department; board.



   There shall be a department of campaign finance.



Section 1052. Campaign finance board.



   a.   1.   There shall be a campaign finance board consisting of
five members. Two members of the board shall be appointed by the mayor,
provided that not more than one such member shall be enrolled in any one
political party, and two members shall be appointed by the speaker of the
council, provided that not more than one such member shall be enrolled in any
one political party, and one member, who shall be the chairperson, shall be
appointed by the mayor after consultation with the speaker. The members shall
first be appointed to serve as follows:



         (a)   one member appointed by the speaker for a term of
one year;



         (b)   one member appointed by the mayor for a term of
two years;



         (c)   one member appointed by the speaker for a term of
three years;



         (d)   one member appointed by the mayor for a term of
four years; and



         (e)   the chairperson for a term of five years.



      The first term shall commence on April first, nineteen hundred
eighty-eight. Thereafter, each member shall be appointed, by the mayor or the
speaker, according to the original manner of appointment, for a term of five
years that shall, for any term beginning on or after March first two thousand
eleven, commence on December first. Terms that began before, and have not
expired on, March first, two thousand eleven shall be extended and shall
expire on the November thirtieth following their original March thirty-first
expiration dates. Upon expiration of the term of a member, if the mayor or
the speaker, as appropriate, shall fail to appoint a member within one
hundred twenty days of the expiration of such term, the member whose term has
expired shall be deemed appointed for an additional term of five years,
provided, however, that if the expiration of such term occurs in a year in
which elections, except special elections, covered by the voluntary system of
campaign finance reform are scheduled, the member whose term has expired
shall be deemed appointed for an additional term of five years if the mayor
or the speaker, as appropriate, shall fail to appoint a member within ninety
days of the expiration of such term. In case of a vacancy in the office of a
member, a member shall be appointed to serve the remainder of the unexpired
term by the mayor or the speaker, according to the original manner of
appointment. If the mayor or the speaker, as appropriate, shall fail to
appoint a member within one hundred eighty days of such vacancy, then a
member shall be appointed by the board to serve for the remainder of the
unexpired term, if additional time remains in such term, provided, however,
that if such vacancy occurs in a year, or within ninety days prior to a year,
in which elections, except special elections, covered by the voluntary system
of campaign finance reform are scheduled, then a member shall be appointed by
the board to serve for the remainder of the unexpired term, if additional
time remains in such term, if the mayor or the speaker, as appropriate, shall
fail to appoint a member within ninety days of such vacancy. Except for the
chairperson, such member shall not be enrolled in the same political party as
the other member appointed by the official who failed to so appoint. Each
member shall be a resident of the city, registered to vote therein. Each
member shall agree not to make contributions to any candidate for nomination
for election, or election, to the office of mayor, public advocate,
comptroller, borough president, or member of the council which in the
aggregate are in excess of the maximum contribution applicable to such office
pursuant to any local law establishing a voluntary system of campaign finance
reform. No member shall serve as an officer of a political party, or be a
candidate, or participate in any capacity in a campaign by a candidate, for
nomination for election or election to the office of mayor, public advocate,
comptroller, borough president or member of the city council. Officers and
employees of the city or any city agency, lobbyists required to file a
statement of registration under section 3-213 of the administrative code and
the employees of such lobbyists shall not be eligible to be members of the
board. In appointing members to the board, the mayor and the speaker shall
consider campaign experience in general and particularly campaign experience
with the New York city campaign finance system. Members of the board shall be
required to undergo training developed pursuant to paragraph 14 of this
section.



      2.   The members of the board shall be compensated at the rate
of one hundred dollars per calendar day when performing the work of the board.



      3.   The board may employ necessary staff, including an
executive director and a counsel, and make necessary expenditures subject to
appropriation.



      4.   No member of the campaign finance board shall be removed
from office except for cause and upon notice and hearing.



      5.   The board shall have the power to investigate all matters
relating to the performance of its functions and any other matter relating to
the proper administration of any voluntary system of campaign finance reform
established by local law and for such purposes shall have the power to
require the attendance and examine and take the testimony under oath of such
persons as it shall deem necessary and to require the production of books,
accounts, papers and other evidence relative to such investigation.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the investigative and
adjudicatory powers and functions of the staff to the board shall be separate
and no staff member of the board shall perform both investigative and
adjudicatory tasks or functions.



      6.   The board shall publicize, as it deems appropriate, the
names of candidates for nomination or election to the office of the mayor,
public advocate, comptroller, borough president, or city council who violate
any of the provisions of any voluntary system of campaign finance reform
established by local law.



      7.   The board may render advisory opinions with respect to
questions arising under any local law establishing a voluntary system of
campaign finance reform. Such advisory opinions may be rendered on the
written request of a candidate, an officer of a political committee or member
of the public, or may be rendered on its own initiative. The board shall make
public its advisory opinions. The board shall develop a program for informing
candidates and the public as to the purpose and effect of the provisions of
any voluntary system of campaign finance reform established by local law.



      8.   The board shall have the authority to promulgate such
rules and provide such forms as it deems necessary for the administration of
any voluntary system of campaign finance reform established by local law. The
board shall promulgate regulations concerning the form in which contributions
and expenditures are to be reported, the periods during which such reports
must be filed and the verification required. The board shall require the
filing of reports of contributions and expenditures for purposes of
determining compliance with any contribution or expenditure limitations
provided in any local law establishing a voluntary system of campaign finance
reform, provided that the schedule established by the board for such filings
shall be in accordance with the schedule specified by the state board of
elections for the filing of campaign receipt and expenditure statements.



      9.   The board shall develop a computer data base that shall
contain all information necessary for the proper administration of this
chapter including information on contributions to and expenditures by
candidates and their authorized committees and distributions of moneys from
the campaign finance funds. Such data base shall be accessible to the public.



      10.   The board may take such other actions as are necessary
and proper to carry out the purposes of any local law establishing a
voluntary system of campaign finance reform. If at any time, the board
determines that the amount of money in any special fund or funds established
by any such local law, establishing a voluntary system of campaign finance
reform, to fund a system of optional public campaign financing for candidates
abiding by the requirements of such law, is insufficient, or is likely to be
insufficient, for payment to such participating candidates pursuant to such
law, it shall report this determination to the commissioner of finance, along
with its estimate of the additional amount which will be necessary to provide
such participating candidates with financing pursuant to such law and a
detailed statement of the assumptions and methodologies on which such
estimate is based. Not more than four days after receiving such estimate and
supporting materials, the commissioner of finance shall transfer an amount
equal to such estimate from the general fund to such special fund or funds.
All monies transferred to such special fund or funds shall not be considered
revenues of the city and payments from such fund or funds shall be made
without appropriation and shall not be included in the expense budget of the
city. The comptroller shall have custody of such fund or funds on behalf of
the board and shall have the power to invest the monies of such fund or funds
in the manner in which the city is authorized to invest its funds and shall
deposit the monies of the fund or funds in such deposit banks as have been
designated by the banking commission pursuant to section fifteen hundred
twenty-four of this charter. The comptroller shall submit monthly reports to
the board regarding the status of the fund or funds and more frequent reports
when the board requires. Monies of the fund or funds shall be paid out by the
comptroller only on warrant of the board.



      11.   The board shall have the authority to implement any
system established for the regulation of inauguration and transition
donations and expenditures including the promulgation of rules and
regulations and the imposition of any penalties related thereto, as required
by local law.



      12.   (a)   The board shall require that candidates
participating in the voluntary system of campaign finance reform or
candidates who otherwise file disclosure reports with the board shall
disclose to the board the acceptance of campaign contributions from
individuals and entities doing business with the city. The board shall
promulgate such rules as it deems necessary to implement and administer this
provision and provide that information regarding such contributions shall be
accessible to the public. The board shall also promulgate such rules as it
deems necessary to regulate the acceptance by candidates participating in the
voluntary system of campaign finance reform of campaign contributions from
individuals and entities doing business with the city, including rules that
determine which business dealings shall be covered by such rules. Elected
officials, city agencies, boards and commissions, including the mayor,
comptroller, public advocate, borough presidents, the city council and
members of the city council shall cooperate with the board to provide to the
board such information about such individuals and entities as the board shall
require.



         (b)   The board shall promulgate such rules as it deems
necessary to attribute expenditures that indirectly assist or benefit a
candidate participating in the voluntary system of campaign finance reform as
in-kind contributions to such candidate.



         (c)   In promulgating rules pursuant to this paragraph,
the board shall consider the following criteria: (1) the effectiveness of the
voluntary system of campaign finance reform, (2) the costs of such system,
(3) the maintenance of a reasonable balance between the burdens of such
system and the incentives to candidates to participate in such system.



         (d)   Any rules promulgated pursuant to this paragraph
shall apply only with respect to nomination for election, or election, to the
office of mayor, public advocate, comptroller, borough president, or member
of the city council.



         (e)   Proposed rules promulgated pursuant to this
paragraph shall be published in accordance with subdivision b of section one
thousand forty-three of this charter no later than December thirty-first,
nineteen hundred ninety-nine. Final rules promulgated pursuant to this
paragraph shall be adopted in accordance with such section as soon as
practicable thereafter. Final rules adopted in the initial promulgation of
rules pursuant to this paragraph shall supersede any inconsistent provisions
of the administrative code that are in effect on the effective date of such
final rules.



      13.   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the board
shall prohibit candidates for offices covered by the voluntary system of
campaign finance reform from accepting, either directly or indirectly, a
campaign contribution, loan, guarantee or other security for such loan, from
any corporation. The board shall promulgate such rules as it deems necessary
to implement and administer this provision.



      14.   a.   The council and the mayor, in conjunction with
the campaign finance board, shall develop a curriculum to be used to train
members of the campaign finance board and staff. Such curriculum shall
include the issues and problems confronted by campaigns for covered office
and how the application and enforcement of the city's campaign finance laws
impacts these campaigns.



      15.   (a)    For purposes of this paragraph, the following
terms shall have the following meanings:



            (i)   "Independent expenditure" shall mean a
monetary or in-kind expenditure made, or liability incurred, in support of or
in opposition to a candidate in a covered election or municipal ballot
proposal or referendum, where no candidate, nor any agent or political
committee authorized by a candidate, has authorized, requested, suggested,
fostered or cooperated in any such activity. The term "independent
expenditure" shall not include:



               (1)   the value of services provided without
compensation by individuals who volunteer a portion or all of their time,



               (2)   the use of real or personal property
and the cost of invitations, food and beverages voluntarily provided by an
individual, to the extent such services do not exceed five hundred dollars in
value,



               (3)   the travel expenses of any individual
who on his or her own behalf volunteers his or her personal services, to the
extent such expenses are unreimbursed and do not exceed five hundred dollars
in value,



               (4)   any expenditure made, or liability
incurred, that is considered to be a contribution to a candidate under any
provision of this charter or local law, or under any rule promulgated by the
board, and



               (5)   any communication by a labor or other
membership organization aimed at its members, or by a corporation aimed at
its stockholders. This exemption does not apply to party committees,
constituted committees, political clubs, or other entities organized
primarily for the purpose of influencing elections. For purposes of this
subparagraph:



                  (A)    "member" shall mean (I) any
individual who, pursuant to a specific provision of an organization's
articles or bylaws, has the right to vote directly or indirectly for the
election of a director or directors or an officer or officers or on a
disposition of all or substantially all of the assets of the organization or
on a merger or on a dissolution; (II) any individual who is designated in the
articles or bylaws as a member and, pursuant to a specific provision of an
organization's articles or bylaws, has the right to vote on changes to the
articles or bylaws, or pays or has paid membership dues in an amount
predetermined by the organization so long as the organization is tax exempt
under section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986; or (III) any
individual who resides within the same household as a "member" as defined in
this paragraph;    



                  (B)   members of a local union shall
be considered to be members of any national or international union of which
the local union is a part and of any federation with which the local,
national or international union is affiliated; and



                  (C)   "stockholder" shall mean any
individual who has a vested beneficial interest in stock, has the power to
direct how that stock shall be voted, if it is voting stock, and has the
right to receive dividends, or any individual who resides within the same
household as a "stockholder" as defined in this paragraph.



               (6)   any de minimis, incidental
communication by a labor or other membership organization or corporation with
non-members or non-stockholders, provided that the labor or other membership
organization or corporation uses reasonable efforts to restrict the
communication to its members or stockholders.



            (ii)   "Entity" shall mean any corporation,
limited liability company, partnership, limited liability partnership,
political committee, political party or party committee, employee
organization or labor organization, association, club, or other organization.



            (iii)   "Covered election" shall mean any primary,
run-off primary, special, run-off special or general election for nomination
for election, or election, to the office of mayor, public advocate,
comptroller, borough president or member of the city council.



         (b)   Every individual and entity that makes independent
expenditures aggregating one thousand dollars or more in support of or in
opposition to any candidate in any covered election, or in support of or in
opposition to any municipal ballot proposal or referendum, shall be required
to disclose such expenditure to the board. In addition, every entity that, in
the twelve months preceding a covered election, makes independent
expenditures aggregating five thousand dollars or more in support of or in
opposition to any candidate in any covered election shall disclose the
following: (i) the identity of any entity that, on or after the first day of
the calendar year preceding the covered election, contributed to the entity
reporting the expenditure, and the owners, partners, board members, and
officers, or their equivalents, of such contributing entity, or, if no
individuals exist in any such roles, the name of at least one individual who
exercises control over the activities of such contributing entity; (ii) the
identity of any entity or individual who, in the twelve months preceding the
covered election, contributed twenty-five thousand dollars or more to any
entity that, in the twelve months preceding the covered election, contributed
fifty thousand dollars or more to the entity reporting the expenditure; and
(iii) the identity of any individual who, in the twelve months preceding the
covered election, contributed one thousand dollars or more to the entity
reporting the expenditure.



         (c)   Any literature, advertisement or other
communication in support of or in opposition to any candidate in any covered
election that is paid for by an individual or entity making independent
expenditures aggregating one thousand dollars or more shall, in addition to
any applicable disclosure requirements in state law, disclose information as
follows:



            (i)   on any written, typed, or printed
communication, or on any internet text or graphical advertisement, in a
conspicuous size and style, the words "Paid for by" followed by the name of
the individual or the name of the entity, the name of its owner, if any, and
the name of its chief executive officer or equivalent, if any, and, following
the words "Top Three Donors," a list of the three largest aggregate donors to
such entity in the twelve months preceding the election, except that no donor
that contributed less than five thousand dollars to the disclosing entity in
the twelve months preceding the election shall be included in such
disclosure, and except that if such entity has only one or two donors that
contributed at least five thousand dollars the words "Top Three Donors" shall
be replaced by the words "Top Donor" or "Top Donors" as applicable, and
except that expenditures funded by an individual or where no such donors
exist need not include the words "Top Three Donors" or a list of donors, and
except that this clause shall not apply to communications required to include
a disclosure pursuant to subdivision sixteen of section 3-703 of the
administrative code. If the third largest donor to the disclosing entity has
donated the same amount in the twelve months preceding the election as the
fourth largest donor during such period, such entity may choose which three
donors to include so long as no donor is included that has donated less in
the twelve months preceding the election than any other donor that is not
included. Such written disclosures shall further include, in a conspicuous
size and style, the following words: "More information at
nyc.gov/FollowTheMoney." The board may, at its discretion, designate a
website other than nyc.gov/FollowTheMoney as the website that must be
included in such disclosure. All disclosures required by this clause shall be
enclosed in a box within the borders of the communication or advertisement
that contains only those disclosures required by this subparagraph, the rules
of the board, the election law, or any other applicable law or rule. For the
purposes of this clause, the "owner" of an entity shall be an individual or
entity with a greater than fifty percent ownership interest in such entity.
The disclosures required by this clause shall not apply to bumper stickers,
pins, buttons, pens, and similar small items upon which such disclosures
cannot be reasonably printed;



            (ii)   on any paid television advertisement or
paid internet video advertisement, clearly spoken in a pitch and tone
substantially similar to the rest of the advertisement, at the beginning or
end of the advertisement, the words "paid for by" followed by the name of the
individual or the name of the entity, and, in a conspicuous size and style
simultaneous with such spoken disclosure, the written words "Paid for by"
followed by the name of the individual or the name of the entity, followed by
the words "The top three donors to the organization responsible for this
advertisement are," followed by a list of the three largest aggregate donors
to such entity in the twelve months preceding the election, except that no
donor that contributed less than five thousand dollars to the disclosing
entity in the twelve months preceding the election shall be included in such
disclosure, and except that if such entity has only one or two donors that
contributed at least five thousand dollars the words "top three donors" shall
be replaced by the words "top donor" or "top donors" as applicable, and
except that expenditures funded by an individual or where no such donors
exist need not include the words "The top three donors to the organization
responsible for this advertisement are" or a list of donors, and except that
this clause shall not apply to communications required to include a
disclosure pursuant to subdivision sixteen of section 3-703 of the
administrative code. If the third largest donor to the disclosing entity has
donated the same amount in the twelve months preceding the election as the
fourth largest donor during such period, such entity may choose which three
donors to include so long as no donor is included that has donated less in
the twelve months preceding the election than any other donor that is not
included. Such written disclosures shall further include, in a conspicuous
size and style, the following words: "More information at
nyc.gov/FollowTheMoney." The board may, at its discretion, designate a
website other than nyc.gov/FollowTheMoney as the website that must be
included in such disclosure. All written disclosures required by this clause
shall be enclosed in a box that contains only those disclosures required by
this subparagraph, the rules of the board, the election law, or any other
applicable law or rule;



            (iii)   in any paid radio advertisement, paid
internet audio advertisement, or automated telephone call, clearly spoken in
a pitch and tone substantially similar to the rest of the advertisement or
call, at the end of the advertisement or call, the words "paid for by"
followed by the name of the individual or the name of the entity, followed by
the words "with funding provided by," followed by a list of the three largest
aggregate donors to such entity in the twelve months preceding the election,
except that no donor that contributed less than five thousand dollars to the
disclosing entity in the twelve months preceding the election shall be
included in such disclosure, and except that expenditures funded by an
individual or where no such donors exist need not include the words "with
funding provided by" or a list of donors, and except that this clause shall
not apply to communications required to include a disclosure pursuant to
subdivision sixteen of section 3-703 of the administrative code. If the third
largest donor to the disclosing entity has donated the same amount in the
twelve months preceding the election as the fourth largest donor during such
period, such entity may choose which three donors to include so long as no
donor is included that has donated less in the twelve months preceding the
election than any other donor that is not included. In the case of a radio or
internet audio advertisement covered by this clause that is thirty seconds in
duration or shorter, the clearly spoken words "more information at
nyc.gov/FollowTheMoney" may be included in a pitch and tone substantially
similar to the rest of the advertisement, instead of the words "with funding
provided by" followed by a list of the three largest aggregate donors in the
twelve months preceding the election. The board may, at its discretion,
designate a website other than nyc.gov/FollowTheMoney as the website that
must be included in such disclosure; and



            (iv)   in any non-automated telephone call,
clearly spoken during any such call lasting longer than ten seconds, the
words "this call is paid for by," followed by the name of the individual or
the name of the entity, followed by the words "more information is available
at nyc.gov/FollowTheMoney." The board may, at its discretion, designate a
website other than nyc.gov/FollowTheMoney as the website that must be
included in such disclosure.



            (v)   For communications primarily in languages
other than English for which disclosure is required under this subparagraph,
such disclosure shall be in the primary language of the communication instead
of English, except that the web address nyc.gov/FollowTheMoney, or such other
website as the board has designated, if required to be written or spoken in
such disclosure, shall be in English.



         (d)   The board may, upon notice and opportunity to be
heard, assess civil penalties in an amount not in excess of ten thousand
dollars for each violation of this paragraph. The intentional or knowing
violation of this paragraph shall be punishable as a misdemeanor in addition
to any other penalty provided under law.



         (e)   The board shall promulgate rules concerning the
form and manner in which independent expenditures are to be reported and
disclosed, the information to be reported and disclosed, the periods during
which reports must be filed, and the verification required. The board shall
promulgate such additional rules as it deems necessary to implement,
administer, interpret and enforce this paragraph and shall provide in such
rules that information regarding independent expenditures be promptly made
accessible to the public during the covered election cycle.



      16.   [Repealed.].



      17.   [Repealed.].



      18.   [Repealed.].



      19.   [Repealed.].



      20.   [Repealed.].



      21.   [Repealed.].



      22.   [Repealed.].



   b.   1.   The board shall take such actions as it deems necessary
and appropriate to improve public awareness of the candidates, ballot
proposals or referenda in all elections in which there are contested
elections for the offices of mayor, public advocate, borough presidents,
comptroller, or city council or ballot proposals or referenda pursuant to
this charter or the municipal home rule law, including but not necessarily
limited to the publication of a non-partisan, impartial voter guide in at
least one media format providing information on candidates, ballot proposals
and referenda, and the distribution of one copy of such guide to each
household in which there is at least one registered voter eligible to vote in
the election involved. A voter may opt out of receiving a printed copy of
such guide and the board shall comply with this request to the extent
feasible.



      2.   The board shall also take such actions as it deems
necessary and appropriate to improve public awareness of the candidates in
all other contested elections held in the city of New York for any city,
county, state, or federal office or ballot proposals or referenda pursuant to
city, county, state, or federal law, including but not necessarily limited to
the publication of a non-partisan, impartial voter guide in at least one
media format providing information on such candidates, ballot proposals or
referenda. The board shall coordinate with other agencies in general and
specialized efforts to improve public awareness of such candidates,
proposals, or referenda.



      3.   In any year in which the board publishes a voter guide
pursuant to paragraph 1 of this subdivision, if the board determines that the
amount of money in its budget is insufficient or likely to be insufficient
for the publication and distribution of such guide, it shall report such
determination to the director of the office of management and budget, who,
after consultation with the board, shall, without an appropriation, transfer
to the board a reasonable amount, as the director shall determine, to cover
the cost of publishing and distributing such guide; provided however, that
for any election in any district in which (i) there are no contested
elections for the office of mayor, public advocate, borough president,
comptroller or city council, and (ii) there has been no administrative
action, or determination of a court of final, competent jurisdiction, to
include a ballot proposal or referendum at such election sixty days or more
prior to the date of such election, the board shall not publish or distribute
a printed copy of such guide, but shall instead make available to the public
on its website information to the extent practicable regarding any proposal
or referendum that is to be included on the ballot.



   c.   The board shall, not later than March tenth of each year,
approve and submit to the mayor detailed itemized estimates of the financial
needs of the campaign finance board for the ensuing fiscal year. Such
estimates shall be comprised of at least one personal service unit of
appropriation and at least one other than personal service unit of
appropriation. The mayor shall include such estimates in the executive budget
without revision, but with such recommendations as the mayor may deem proper.
Upon inclusion in the executive budget, the budget submitted by the campaign
finance board shall be adopted pursuant to such provisions of chapter ten of
this charter as are applicable to the operating budget of the council.



   d.   The board may take such other actions as are necessary and
proper to carry out any other authority the city council shall give to the
board in any local law, including the promulgation of any rules and the
provision of any forms.



   e.   The board shall take such actions as it deems necessary and
appropriate to encourage, promote, and facilitate voter registration and
voting by all residents of New York City who are eligible to vote, including,
but not necessarily limited to the employment of a coordinator of voter
assistance and other necessary staff. The board shall have authority to
promulgate rules in order to implement the voter assistance provisions of
this chapter, except that any rules with respect to city agency operations
concerning voter registration and voting, including but not limited to
implementation of section one thousand fifty-seven-a, shall be promulgated in
conjunction with the office of the mayor through its office of operations.



(Am. L.L. 2016/170, 12/22/2016; Am. L.L. 2018/211, 12/3/2018, eff. 1/12/2019;
Am. L.L. 2019/001, 1/2/2019; Am. L.L. 2019/128, 7/14/2019)



Section 1053. Voter guide.



   a.   For all elections in which there are contested elections for
the offices of mayor, public advocate, borough presidents, comptroller, or
city council or ballot proposals or referenda pursuant to this charter or the
municipal home rule law, each printed voter guide published by the board
shall contain:



      1.   material explaining the date and hours during which the
polls will be open for that election; when, where, and how to register to
vote; when a citizen is required to reregister; when, where, and how absentee
ballots are obtained and used; instructions on how to vote; information on
the political subdivisions applicable to a particular citizen's address; and
any other general information on voting deemed by the board to be necessary
or useful to the electorate or otherwise consistent with the goals of this
charter;



      2.   such tables of contents, graphics, and other materials
which the board determines will make the voter guide easier to understand or
more useful for the average voter;



      3.   information on each candidate, including but not limited
to name, party affiliation, present and previous public offices held, present
occupation and employer, prior employment and other public service
experience, educational background, a listing of major organizational
affiliations and endorsements, and a concise statement by each candidate of
his or her principles, platform or views;



      4.   where there is a ballot proposal or referendum, concise
statements explaining such proposal or referendum and an abstract of each
such proposal or referendum; and



      5.   For a voter guide mailed in connection with the citywide
primary and general elections held every four years, such voter guide shall
include for each registered voter a list of the primary and general elections
held over the previous four calendar years for which, according to the
records of the board of elections, such voter was registered to vote and
whether such voter voted in each such election. Such information may be
printed separately from such voter guide, provided that it is included with
the mailing of such voter guide.



   b.   For all other elections in which there are contested elections
held in the city of New York for any city, county, state, or federal office
or ballot proposals or referenda pursuant to city, county, state, or federal
law, each voter guide shall contain information that the board deems
necessary or useful to the electorate or is otherwise consistent with the
board's responsibility under this chapter to improve public awareness of
candidates, ballot proposals, or referenda.



   c.   Voter guides shall be prepared in plain language using words
with common and everyday meanings.



   d.   The board shall promulgate such rules as it deems necessary for
the preparation and publication of voter guides in English, Spanish and any
other languages the board determines to be necessary and appropriate and for
the distribution of the guide in at least one media format. The purpose of
such rules shall be to ensure that the guide and its distribution will serve
to fully, fairly and impartially inform the public about the issues and
candidates appearing on the ballot.



(Am. L.L. 2016/170, 12/22/2016; Am. L.L. 2017/088, 5/30/2017, eff. 1/1/2018)



Section 1054. Voter assistance advisory committee.



   a.   There shall be a voter assistance advisory committee consisting
of nine members, which shall assist the board with its duties and
responsibilities under this chapter, including but not limited to overseeing
the voter assistance program established by this chapter. Two members shall
be appointed by the mayor, provided that not more than one such member shall
be enrolled in any one political party; two members shall be appointed by the
speaker of the city council, provided that not more than one such member
shall be enrolled in any one political party; one member shall be appointed
by the comptroller; one member shall be appointed by the borough presidents
acting together; and one member shall be appointed by the mayor in
consultation with the speaker and shall serve as chair. In addition, the
committee shall include the public advocate, or in his or her absence, a
representative, and the executive director of the board of elections (or, in
his or her absence, the deputy executive director of the board of elections).
In appointing members to the committee, the mayor, speaker, comptroller and
borough presidents shall consider experience with groups or categories of
residents that are underrepresented among those who vote or among those who
are registered to vote and community, voter registration, civil rights, and
disabled groups. The appointed members shall first be appointed to serve as
follows:



      1.   one member appointed by the speaker for a term of one
year;



      2.   one member appointed by the mayor for a term of two years;



      3.   one member appointed by the speaker for a term of three
years;



      4.   one member appointed by the mayor for a term of four
years;



      5.   one member appointed by the comptroller for a term of
four years;



      6.   one member appointed by the borough presidents for a term
of five years; and



      7.   the chair, appointed by the mayor in consultation with
the speaker for a term of five years.



   Each term shall commence on January first, two thousand eleven.
Thereafter, each member shall be appointed for a term of five years according
to the original manner of appointment. Upon expiration of the term of a
member, if the appointing official or officials shall fail to appoint a
member within one hundred twenty days of the expiration of such term, the
member whose term has expired shall be deemed appointed for an additional
term of five years. In case of a vacancy in the office of an appointed
member, a member shall be appointed to serve for the remainder of the
unexpired term according to the original manner of appointment. For
appointees of the mayor or speaker, such member shall not be enrolled in the
same political party as the other member appointed by the official making the
appointment to fill the vacancy. Each member shall be a resident of the city,
registered to vote therein. No member other than the public advocate shall
serve as an officer of a political party, or be a candidate, or participate
in any capacity in a campaign by a candidate, for nomination for election or
election to the office of mayor, public advocate, comptroller, borough
president or member of the city council. The members of the committee shall
serve without compensation.



   b.   The board, with the advice and assistance of the committee and
the coordinator of voter assistance, shall:



      1.   encourage and facilitate voter registration and voting by
all residents of New York City who are eligible to vote, and recommend
methods to increase the rate of registration and voting by such residents;



      2.   identify groups or categories of such residents who are
underrepresented among those registered and those voting and recommend
methods to increase the rate of voter registration and voting among such
groups and categories;



      3.   consistent with all state and local laws, coordinate the
activities of all city agencies in general and specialized efforts to
increase registration and voting including, but not limited to, the
distribution of forms for citizens who use or come in contact with the
services of city agencies and institutions; mailings by city agencies to
reach citizens; cooperative efforts with non-partisan voter registration
groups, community boards, agencies of city, state, and federal governments,
and entities doing business in the city; the development and distribution of
guidance for agencies designated as participating agencies pursuant to
section 1057-a on the voting rights of formerly incarcerated persons;
publicity and other efforts to educate youth about the importance of voting
and to encourage eligible youth to register to vote; and other outreach
programs;



      4.   make such recommendations as it deems appropriate to the
mayor, the council, the borough presidents, and the board of elections for
steps that should be taken by such officials or bodies or by city agencies to
encourage and facilitate voter registration and voting by all residents of
New York City who are eligible to vote;



      5.   undertake, by itself or in cooperation with other public
or private entities, activities intended to encourage and facilitate voter
registration and voting by all residents of New York City who are eligible or
may become eligible to vote, including eligible voters who are limited in
English proficiency and incarcerated or formerly incarcerated persons who are
or may become eligible to vote;



      6.   prepare and publish reports, including, at the minimum,
an annual report to be published no later than April thirtieth in each year,
regarding voter registration and voter participation in New York City, and
forward copies of such reports to the mayor, the council, the borough
presidents, and all other public officials with responsibilities for
policies, programs and appropriations related to voter registration and voter
participation in New York City and to private entities that are currently or
potentially involved in activities intended to increase voter registration
and voting. Such annual report shall include, but not be limited to (a) a
description of voter assistance activities and the effectiveness of those
activities in increasing voter registration and voter participation; (b) the
number of voter registration forms distributed by the programs related to
voter assistance and voter participation, the manner in which those forms
were distributed and the estimated number of persons registered through the
activities of the programs, including the number of voter registration
application forms received and transmitted to the New York city board of
elections during the preceding calendar year pursuant to section 1057-f, both
in total and disaggregated for the website and mobile application; (c) the
number and characteristics of citizens registered and unregistered to vote
during the previous primary, general and special elections and for the most
recent time period for which such information is available; (d) the number
and characteristics of citizens who voted during the previous primary,
general and special elections; (e) a review and analysis of voter
registration and voter participation processes in New York City during the
previous year, including data on usage and visitation for the website and
mobile application required pursuant to section 1057-f; (f) recommendations
for increasing voter registration and voter participation; and (g) any other
information or analysis the board deems necessary and appropriate; and



      7.   monitor voter registration and voting in New York City,
and receive citizen complaints regarding such processes.



      8.   conduct yearly trainings for all relevant staff of the
department of correction. Such training shall include, at minimum,
information on voting laws for currently and formerly incarcerated
individuals in the state of New York, voter registration procedures, absentee
voting, and determining eligibility to vote.



   c.   The committee shall meet at least every other month. The
committee shall hold at least two public hearings each year, one following
the issuance of the annual report, and the second between the day following
the general election and December twenty-first, regarding voter registration
and voter participation in New York City. Any member of the board may attend
and participate in committee meetings and hearings.



(Am. L.L. 2017/238, 12/16/2017, eff. 6/16/2019; Am. L.L. 2019/006,
12/29/2018, eff. 4/28/2019; Am. L.L. 2019/011, 12/29/2018, eff. 6/29/2019)



Section 1055. Coordinator of voter assistance. [Repealed]



Section 1056. Cooperation of mayoral agencies.



   Heads of mayoral agencies shall cooperate to the extent practicable
with the board of elections and the campaign finance board and its
coordinator of voter assistance to improve public awareness of the
candidates, proposals or referenda in all elections in which there are
contested elections held in the city of New York for any city, county, state,
or federal office and/or ballot proposals or referenda pursuant to city,
county, state, or federal law, and to encourage voter registration and voting
by all residents of the city of New York eligible to vote. Such cooperation
shall include providing the campaign finance board with appropriate
information concerning the resources, opportunities, and locations the agency
can provide for public awareness and voter assistance activities.



Section 1056-b. Posting of sample ballots online by the board of elections.



   The board of elections shall make available on its website, at least
one week before an election, sample ballots that adhere to the requirements
of section 7-118 of the election law.



Section 1057. Non-partisanship in program operations.



   The campaign finance board and the voter assistance advisory committee
shall conduct all their activities in a strictly non-partisan manner.



Section 1057-a. Agency based voter registration.



   Each agency designated as a participating agency under the provisions
of this section shall implement and administer a program of distribution of
voter registration forms pursuant to the provisions of this section. The
following offices are hereby designated as participating voter registration
agencies: The administration for children's services, the business integrity
commission, the city clerk, the civilian complaint review board, the
commission on human rights, community boards, the department of small
business services, the department for the aging, the department of citywide
administrative services, the department of city planning, the department of
consumer affairs, the department of correction, the department of cultural
affairs, the department of environmental protection, the department of
finance, the department of health and mental hygiene, the department of
homeless services, the department of housing preservation and development,
the department of parks and recreation, the department of probation, the
department of records and information services, the taxi and limousine
commission, the department of transportation, the department of youth and
community development, the fire department, and the human resources
administration. Participating agencies shall include a mandate in all new or
renewed agreements with those subcontractors having regular contact with the
public in the daily administration of their business to follow the guidelines
of this section. Such participating agencies shall be required to offer voter
registration forms to all persons together with written applications for
services, renewal or recertification for services and change of address
relating to such services, in the same language as such application, renewal,
recertification or change of address form where practicable; provided however
that this section shall not apply to services that must be provided to
prevent actual or potential danger to the life, health, or safety of any
individual or of the public. Such agencies shall provide assistance to
applicants in completing voter registration forms, including the section of
the form allowing for registration to become an organ donor, and in cases in
which such an agency would provide assistance with its own form, such agency
shall provide the same degree of assistance with regard to the voter
registration and organ donor forms as is provided with regard to the
completion of its own form, if so requested. As part of such assistance, such
agencies shall also, upon request by an applicant who identifies himself or
herself as being on parole and when practically feasible, check publicly
available information to inform such applicant if a restoration of their
right to vote has been granted, provided that such assistance may be provided
by a person other than the person to whom the request was made and further
provided that such assistance shall not be considered an endorsement of the
accuracy of any publicly available information not maintained by the city.
Such agencies shall also receive and transmit the completed application form
from any applicants who request to have such form transmitted to the board of
elections for the city of New York.



   1.   Participating agencies shall adopt such rules and regulations
as may be necessary to implement this section. The campaign finance board
shall prepare and distribute to participating agencies written advisory
agency guidelines as to the implementation of this section and may establish
training programs for employees of participating agencies; provided that any
guidelines promulgated by the voter assistance commission prior to the
effective date of this clause shall remain in effect unless further amended
or repealed by the board. Participating agencies may consider such advisory
agency guidelines in the promulgation of their rules and regulations.



   2.   Participating agencies shall provide and distribute voter
registration forms to all persons together with written applications for
services, renewal or recertification for services and change of address
relating to such services, in the same language as such application, renewal,
recertification or change of address form where practicable; provided however
that this section shall not apply to services that must be provided to
prevent actual or potential danger to life, health or safety of any
individual or of the public. Participating agency staff shall provide
assistance in completing these distributed voter registration forms,
including the section of the form allowing for registration to become an
organ donor, and in cases in which such an agency would provide assistance
with its own form, such agency shall provide the same degree of assistance
with regard to the voter registration and organ donor forms as is provided
with regard to the completion of its own form, if so requested. Participating
agencies shall also include a voter registration form with any agency
communication sent through the United States mail for the purpose of
supplying clients with application, renewal or recertification for services
and change of address relating to such services materials. Participating
agencies shall also incorporate an opportunity to request a voter
registration application into any application for services, renewal or
recertification for services and change of address relating to such services
provided on computer terminals, the World Wide Web or the Internet. Any
person indicating that they wish to be sent a voter registration form, via
computer terminals, the World Wide Web or the Internet shall be provided with
a link to the website and mobile application required pursuant to section
1057-f and, at the person’s discretion, sent such a form by the
participating agency, or directed to a bank on that system where such a form
may be downloaded. Each participating agency shall also maintain on its
website at least one link to the website and mobile application required
pursuant to section 1057-f.



   3.   Participating agencies shall also:



      a.   by December 1, 2015, or at the next regularly scheduled
printing of their forms, whichever is earlier, physically incorporate the
voter registration forms with their own application forms in a manner that
permits the voter registration portion to be detached therefrom. Until such
time when the agency amends its form, each agency should affix or include a
postage paid board of elections for the city of New York voter registration
form to or with its application, renewal, recertification and change of
address forms;



      b.   use voter registration forms that contain a code assigned
by the board of elections of the city of New York which designate such forms
as originating from participating agencies; and



      c.   transmit any completed forms collected by such agency to
the board of elections of the city of New York within two weeks of the
receipt of such completed forms at the participating agency. If a completed
form is collected within five days before the last day for registration to
vote in a citywide election, such completed form shall be transmitted by the
participating agency to the board of elections of the city of New York not
later than five days after the date of acceptance, provided, however, that
notwithstanding any other provision of this section, any agency subject to
the requirements of section 5-211 of the election law shall be governed only
by the timeframes for transmission of such forms to the board of elections
set forth in such section.



   4.   All persons seeking voter registration forms and information
shall be advised in writing together with other written materials provided by
agencies or by appropriate publicity that government services are not
conditioned on being registered to vote. No statement shall be made nor any
action taken by an agency employee to discourage the applicant from
registering to vote or to enroll in any particular political party.



   5.   The completion of the voter registration form by an applicant
is voluntary.



   6.   Employees of a participating agency who provide voter
registration assistance shall not:



      a.   seek to influence an applicant's political preference or
party designation;



      b.   display any political preference or party allegiance;



      c.   make any statement to an applicant or take any action the
purpose or effect of which is to discourage the applicant from registering to
vote; or



      d.   make any statement to an applicant or take any action the
purpose or effect of which is to lead the applicant to believe that a
decision to register or not to register has any bearing on the availability
of services or benefits.



   7.   Each participating agency, department, division and office that
makes available voter registration forms shall prominently display
promotional materials designed and approved by the board of elections for the
city of New York or state board of elections for use in state agency programs.



   8.   Each participating agency, other than community boards and the
city clerk, shall submit semi-annual reports on their implementation of this
section to the mayor's office of operations. Such reports shall include the
number of registration forms distributed, the number of registration forms
completed at an agency office to the extent readily ascertainable, and the
number of registration forms transmitted to the board of elections. Such
reports shall be submitted to the mayor's office of operations by January 15
and July 15 of each year, with the first reports due by July 15, 2015. The
mayor's office of operations shall compile such reports into a single report
that disaggregates such data by agency, and shall deliver such compiled
report to the speaker by February 15 and August 15 of each year, with the
first such report due by August 15, 2015.



   9.   In addition to the other requirements of this section, the
department of correction shall implement and administer a program of
distribution and submission of absentee ballot applications, and subsequently
received absentee ballots, for eligible inmates. Such department shall offer,
to all inmates who are registered to vote, absentee ballot applications, and
a means to complete them, during the period from sixty days prior to any
primary, special, or general election in the city of New York until two weeks
prior to any such election. Such department shall subsequently provide any
absentee ballot received from the board of elections in response to any such
application to the applicable inmate, as well as a means to complete it. Such
department shall provide assistance to any such inmate in filling out such
application or ballot upon request. Such department shall, not later than
five days after receipt, transmit such completed applications and ballots
from any inmate who wishes to have them transmitted to the board of elections
for the city of New York. The provisions of this subdivision shall not apply
in any specific instance in which the department deems it unsafe to comply
therewith.



   10.   The department of probation shall, in addition to the other
requirements of this section for participating agencies, distribute during
the intake process, to any person sentenced to probation, a written notice on
the voting rights of persons sentenced to probation in the state of New York.
Such written notice shall be developed in consultation with the voter
assistance advisory committee.



   10.*   The department of correction shall, in addition to the other
requirements of this section for participating agencies, distribute to every
person upon release from custody of the department a written notice on the
voting rights of formerly incarcerated persons in the state of New York,
including information on when such persons are or may become eligible to
vote, and offer to every such person a voter registration form. The
department shall make verbal reference to the distributed written notice and
voter registration form to such individuals upon distribution. Such notice
shall only be required for those who are released from a department facility,
from department custody within a courthouse, and from a department-operated
area within a hospital or healthcare provider. Notice is not required for
those who are released to the custody of another government agency or to the
custody of a hospital or healthcare provider. Such written notice shall be
developed in consultation with the voter assistance advisory committee.



* Editor's note: there are two subdivisions numbered as 10.



(Am. L.L. 2016/138, 11/16/2016, eff. 2/14/2017; Am. L.L. 2016/139,
11/16/2016, eff. 2/14/2017; Am. L.L. 2017/238, 12/16/2017, eff. 6/16/2019;
Am. L.L. 2019/002, 12/29/2018, eff. 4/28/2019; Am. L.L. 2019/006, 12/29/2018,
eff. 4/28/2019; Am. L.L. 2019/011, 12/29/2018, eff. 6/29/2019)



Section 1057-b. Designating and independent nominating petitions; number of
signatures.



   a.   The number of signatures required for any designating petition
or independent nominating petition for the designation or nomination of a
candidate for an elected office of the city shall be governed by applicable
provisions of the New York state election law, except that in no event shall
the number of signatures required exceed the following limits:



      (1)   for the offices of mayor, comptroller, or public
advocate, three thousand seven hundred fifty signatures;



      (2)   for the office of borough president, two thousand
signatures; and



      (3)   for the office of member of the city council, four
hundred fifty signatures.



   b.   (1)   The following provisions of the election law shall not
apply to the extent that they govern the designation or independent
nomination of mayor, comptroller, public advocate, member of the city
council, and borough president: paragraphs (a), (b), and (c-1) of subdivision
two of section 6-136 (designating petitions; number of signatures); and
paragraphs (b), (c), and (d-1) of subdivision two of section 6-142
(independent nominations; number of signatures). Section 6-100 of the
election law shall apply, except to the extent that provisions of article six
of the election law are inapplicable in accordance with this section.



      (2)   Any other provisions that from time to time may be added
to the election law and that relate to the matters covered by the provisions
of the election law that are inapplicable in accordance with this section
shall similarly not apply to the extent that they govern the designation or
nomination of such officers.



      (3)   References to provisions of the election law in this
section shall be deemed to refer to any successors to such provisions.



Section 1057-c. Notice at former poll sites.



   On the day of any primary, special, or general election, prior to the
opening of the polls, the board of elections in the city of New York shall
post a notice on or near the main entrance or entrances of each building that
was used as a poll site in any primary, special, or general election in any
of the prior four calendar years, but which is not being used as a poll site
for the election being held on such day, unless the owner of such building
objects to such notice being posted. Such notice shall only be required at
former poll sites that covered one or more election districts in which an
election is being held on such day. Such notice shall include, but not be
limited to: (i) a statement that the building is not in use as a poll site
for such election, (ii) the address or addresses of the poll site or sites
that are being used for such election, accompanied by a list of the election
districts being served at each such poll site; (iii) the website for the
official poll site locator of the board of elections in the city of New York;
and (iv) a phone number of the board of elections in the city of New York
that may be called for poll site information.



(L.L. 2016/062, 6/5/2016, eff. 1/1/2017)



Section 1057-d. Notifications to voters.



   a.   The board of elections in the city of New York shall send
e-mail and text message notifications related to voting for local, state, and
federal elections to registered New York city voters who provide the board
with an e-mail address or mobile phone number for this purpose. The board
shall provide opportunities for city residents to provide an e-mail address
or mobile phone number to the board for this purpose and shall maintain a
database of all such e-mail addresses and mobile phone numbers. Such e-mail
and text message notifications shall be sent for primary elections, general
elections and special elections for which each such voter is eligible to
vote, for the following purposes and at the following times:



      (1)   notification of the dates and hours of such election, as
well as the applicable poll site location, and any changes thereto, for such
voter, sent ten business days prior to such date, and on election day;



      (2)   notification of the dates, hours, locations, and
eligibility requirements for casting an in-person absentee ballot sent on the
first day of in-person absentee voting for such election;



      (3)   notification of the deadline for submission of a mailed
absentee voting application for such election, sent ten business days prior
to such deadline; and



      (4)   for e-mailed notifications only, distribution to such
voter of an applicable sample ballot, or a link to such sample ballot, for
such election, sent within two business days of such sample ballot being
posted online.



   b.   E-mail and text message notifications sent pursuant to this
section shall include links to the board's website to access relevant forms,
materials and other additional information, as determined by the board, and
shall be available in the languages in which the board publishes the election
notices sent to such voter by mail.



   c.   The board shall provide opportunities for city residents to
provide an e-mail address or mobile phone number through the following means:



      (1)   on voter registration forms;



      (2)   on the board's website;



      (3)   by collecting e-mail addresses at events promoting voter
registration, voter participation, and any other events or meetings the board
deems appropriate;



      (4)   in all mailings to registered voters by directing
recipients of such mailings to the board's website; and



      (5)   by any other means that the board determines would
facilitate the collection of e-mail addresses of registered or prospective
New York city voters.



   d.   The board shall provide all e-mail and text message recipients
under this section the option to unsubscribe from receiving such e-mail or
text message notifications or to update an e-mail address or mobile phone
number previously provided to the board. The board shall not remove any
e-mail address or mobile phone number from its database unless an e-mail or
text message recipient unsubscribes or provides an updated e-mail address or
mobile phone number, or if e-mails or text messages sent to such e-mail
address or mobile phone number are not successfully transmitted for a period
of one year.



   e.   The board shall not share, sell or otherwise disclose e-mail
addresses or mobile phone numbers collected pursuant to this section, except
as otherwise required by law, without acquiring advance written permission
from individuals providing such information, or unless ordered by a court of
law.



(L.L. 2016/064, 6/5/2016, eff. 1/1/2017)



Section 1057-e. Voter information portal.



   The board of elections in the city of New York shall provide a secure
website and mobile application that shall not require the user to create an
account, but shall, through methods determined by the board, require
verification that the user is accessing his or her own record. The
information presented in such website and mobile application shall be updated
with any applicable changes no less frequently than daily. Such website and
mobile application shall include, but not be limited to, the following
functionality:



      a.   allowing any registered voter who has submitted an
application for an absentee ballot, or who otherwise has a right to receive
an absentee ballot, for an upcoming election pursuant to the election law to
view the current status of their absentee application and absentee ballot.
Such website and mobile application shall indicate for each such voter
whether the board of elections in the city of New York has:



         (1)   received such voter's request for an absentee
ballot, if applicable;



         (2)   approved or rejected such request, if applicable,
and, if rejected, a brief statement of the reason for rejection;



         (3)   mailed or delivered an absentee ballot to such
voter for such upcoming election, and shall include the ability for such
voter to see the status of a mailed absentee ballot by United States postal
service intelligent mail barcode or successor technology;



         (4)   received such voter's completed absentee ballot
for such upcoming election; and



         (5)   determined that such voter's completed absentee
ballot was invalid, and, if such a finding was made, a brief statement of the
reason.



      b.   allowing the user to view his or her registration status,
including but not limited to:



         (1)   active status, with the inclusion of the date on
which the user's status became active;



         (2)   inactive status, with a brief explanation of what
this status means and why the user is categorized as such; and



         (3)   purged, with a brief explanation of what this
status means and why the user is categorized as such.



      c.   allowing any registered voter to view the party for which
they are a registered member, if any.



      d.   allowing the user to view the federal, state, and local
election districts in which such user resides.



      e.   informing any registered voter whether they are required
to bring any form of identification to vote and, if so, which form of
identification.



      f.   allowing the user to view which elections held over, at a
minimum, the previous four calendar years for which the records of the board
of elections in the city of New York indicate:



         (1)   that such user was registered to vote; and



         (2)   for such elections, whether such user voted and
whether such user did not vote.



      g.   allowing the user to view, if applicable, the address at
which the user was previously registered to vote.



      h.   through such communication methods as determined by the
board of elections in the city of New York, providing any registered voter
with the option to receive alerts including, but not limited to, a change in
their registration status.



      i.   allowing the user to access existing online resources
including, but not limited to, resources allowing such user to:



         (1)   register to vote;



         (2)   update registration information;



         (3)   view sample ballots;



         (4)   look up polling place locations;



         (5)   look up voting hours;



         (6)   sign up as a poll worker; and



         (7)   view the voter guide.



(L.L. 2016/065, 6/5/2016, eff. 1/1/2017)



Section 1057-f. Online voter registration.



   a.   The campaign finance board shall provide a secure website and
mobile application that allows any individual qualified to vote in the city
of New York to confidentially submit to such board through such website and
mobile application the information collected on a voter registration
application form pursuant to section 5-210 of the election law for the
purpose of registering to vote or updating such individual’s voter
registration. Such website and mobile application shall allow such individual
to electronically provide a signature of a quality and likeness comparable to
a signature written with ink, consistent with subdivision c of this section.
The website and mobile application shall also allow such individual to view
the notices contained on or accompanying a printed voter registration
application form. Upon receipt of such information and signature, the
campaign finance board shall print such information onto a voter registration
application form, electronically-affix such signature, and transmit such
printed application to the New York city board of elections, consistent with
section 5-210 of the election law, or transmit such information and signature
though any other method consistent with section 5-210 of the election law.



   b.   Such website and mobile application shall also conspicuously
set forth information concerning the timeframes and deadlines for applying to
register to vote or updating registration, to assist such individual in
ascertaining whether the registration or update will take effect for the next
election. Such website and mobile application shall also conspicuously set
forth information concerning how a voter may confirm their registration
information.



   c.   The website and mobile application provided pursuant to this
section shall permit the submission of an individual’s signature through
one or more methods determined by the campaign finance board to result in a
signature of a quality and likeness comparable to a signature written with
ink. Methods to be considered by the campaign finance board shall include,
but not be limited to: (i) the uploading of an electronic file; and (ii)
direct input through a touch or stylus interface. In addition to any other
method or methods utilized pursuant to this subdivision, the campaign finance
board may, with the consent of an individual, utilize a signature previously
provided by such individual to an agency or pursuant to the New York city
identity card program, established by section 3-115 of the administrative
code, if such board determines that such signature otherwise meets the
requirements of this section and may be used consistent with the applicable
law governing the program for which the signature was provided.



   d.   To the extent practicable and consistent with the privacy of
users, data security and applicable law, the campaign finance board shall
make available to the public a web application program interface that permits
programs approved by such board to directly transmit voter registration
application form information to such board in a manner equivalent to the
submission authorized by subdivision a of this section.



   e.   The campaign finance board shall transmit voter registration
application forms completed pursuant to this section to the New York city
board of elections within two weeks of receipt of complete information,
including a signature provided in accordance with subdivision c, provided
that if such information is received within two weeks before the last day for
registration to vote in a citywide election, such completed forms shall be
transmitted as soon as is practicable to the New York city board of elections
and if such information is received within five days before the last day for
registration to vote in a citywide election, such completed forms shall be
transmitted to the New York city board of elections not later than five days
after the date of acceptance.



   f.   In implementing the provisions of this section, the campaign
finance board may receive advice and assistance from the voter assistance
advisory committee and the coordinator of voter assistance. In addition, in
implementing such provisions, such board may, with the consent of the mayor,
receive advice and assistance from and delegate any powers and duties set
forth in this section to any office of the mayor or agency the head of which
is appointed by the mayor.



(L.L. 2017/238, 12/16/2017, eff. 6/16/2019)



Chapter 47: Public Access To Meetings and Information



Section 1058. Heads of departments to furnish copies of papers on demand.



   The heads of all administrations and departments, except the police and
law departments, and the chiefs of each and every division or bureau thereof,
and all borough presidents shall, with reasonable promptness, furnish to any
taxpayer desiring the same, a true and certified copy of any book, account or
paper kept by such administration, department, bureau or office, or such part
thereof as may be demanded, upon payment in advance of ten cents for every
hundred words thereof by the person demanding the same. The provisions of
this section shall not apply to any papers prepared by or for the comptroller
for use in any proceeding to adjust or pay a claim against the city or any
agency, or by or for counsel for use in actions or proceedings to which the
city or any agency is a party, or for use in any investigation authorized by
this charter.



Section 1059. Inspection by taxpayers of books and papers.



   All books, accounts and papers in the office of any borough president
or any division or bureau thereof, or in any city administration or
department or any division or bureau thereof, except the police and law
departments, shall at all times be open to the inspection of any taxpayer,
subject to such reasonable rules and regulations in regard to the time and
manner of such inspection as the borough president, administration,
department, office, division or bureau may make; in case such inspection
shall be refused, such taxpayer, on his sworn petition, describing the
particular book, account or paper that he desires to inspect, may, upon
notice of not less than one day, apply to any justice of the supreme court
for an order that he be allowed to make such inspection as such justice shall
by his order authorize. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any
papers prepared by or for the comptroller for use in any proceedings to
adjust or pay a claim against the city or any agency, or by or for counsel
for use in actions or proceedings to which the city or any agency is a party,
or for use in any investigation authorized by this charter.



Section 1060. Public attendance at executive sessions.



   a.   Except as otherwise provided pursuant to subdivision b of this
section, the public may attend all sessions or meetings of the following
agencies whenever items on the calendar of such agency are to be considered
and acted upon in a preliminary or final manner; art commission, conciliation
and appeals board, environmental control board, board of health, landmarks
preservation commission, city planning commission, board of standards and
appeals, tax commission, youth board, and the council and its committees.



   b.   Any agency specified pursuant to subdivision a of this section
may convene an executive session closed to the public by a three-fourths vote
of all of its members, but shall not take final action at any such meeting.



Section 1061. Commission on public information and communication.



   a.   There shall be a commission on public information and
communication which shall consist of the public advocate, as chair, the
corporation counsel or the delegate of such officer, the director of
operations or the delegate of such officer, the commissioner of the
department of records and information services or the delegate of such
officer, the commissioner of information technology and telecommunications or
the delegate of such officer, the president of the WNYC communications group
or the delegate of such officer, and one council member elected by the
council, all of whom shall serve on the board without compensation. In
addition, there shall be four other members, each appointed for a four-year
term, who shall not hold or seek public or political party office or be
public employees in any jurisdiction, except the representative of the
community board as set forth herein, to be appointed as follows: two by the
mayor, one of whom is or has been a representative of the news media and one
of whom shall be a member of a community board; one by the public advocate;
and one by the borough presidents acting as a group. Such members shall
receive a per diem compensation for each calendar day they perform the work
of the commission. No such members shall serve for more than two consecutive
four-year terms. All initial appointments shall be made by the first day of
March, nineteen hundred ninety.



   b.   Members may be removed by the mayor for cause after notice and
opportunity to be heard. Members shall serve until their successors have been
appointed.



   c.   The commission shall appoint an executive director, a general
counsel and such other officers, employees, and consultants as are necessary
to fulfill its duties, within appropriations available therefor.



   d.   The commission shall:



      (1)   undertake, by itself, or in cooperation with other
entities, activities to educate the public about the availability and
potential usefulness of city produced or maintained information and assist
the public in obtaining access to such information;



      (2)   review (i) all city information policies, including but
not limited to, policies regarding public access to city produced or
maintained information, particularly, computerized information; (ii) the
quality, structure, and costs to the public of such information; (iii) agency
compliance with the various notice, comment, and hearing provisions of the
charter and other laws applicable to city agencies; and (iv) the usefulness
and availability of city documents, reports, and publications;



      (3)   assist city agencies in facilitating public access to
their meetings, transcripts, records, and other information, and monitor
agency compliance with the provisions of the charter, and other laws which
require such public access;



      (4)   hold at least one public hearing each year on city
information policies and issue at least one report each year with such
recommendations as the commission deems advisable;



      (5)   on the request of any member of the public, elected
official, or city agency, render advisory opinions regarding the application
of those provisions of the charter or other laws which require public access
to meetings, transcripts, records and other information. Such advisory
opinions shall be indexed by subject matter and maintained on a cumulative
basis;



      (6)   make recommendations regarding: (i) the application of
new communications technology to improve public access to city produced or
maintained information; (ii) the distribution of information to the public
about the purposes and locations of the city's service delivery facilities;
and (iii) programming for the municipal cable channels and broadcasting
system.



Section 1062. Public data directory.



   a.   The commission shall publish annually a directory of the
computerized information produced or maintained by city agencies which is
required by law to be publicly accessible. Such directory shall include
specific descriptions of the contents, format and methods of accessing such
information, and the name, title, office address, and office telephone number
of the official in each agency responsible for receiving inquiries about such
information.



   b.   The mayor shall transmit to the commission such information as
the commission requires to compile and update the public data directory. The
mayor shall also ensure that all agencies provide the commission with such
assistance and information as the commission requires.



Section 1063. Cablecasting and broadcasting the public proceedings of city
government.



   a.   All future cable franchises and franchise renewals shall
require (i) that channels be designated for governmental use and (ii) that
the franchisee provide the interconnections necessary to allow the
cablecasting of the public proceedings of the council and its committees and
the city planning commission.



   b.   The council and its committees and the city planning commission
shall make their public meetings and hearings available for cablecasting and
broadcasting. The council, on the recommendation of the commission on public
information and communication, may by local law require that other agencies
of city government be subject to the requirements of this subdivision.



   c.   On or before the thirtieth day of June, nineteen hundred
ninety-one, the commission on public information and communication shall
submit to the council a proposal for cablecasting the public proceedings of
the council and its committees and the city planning commission. Such
proposal shall include the commission's recommendations regarding (i) the
organization or organizations to be responsible for obtaining such
cablecasting and (ii) funding the start-up and ongoing costs of such
cablecasting.



   d.   Each city agency, committee, commission and task force and the
council shall record or cause to be recorded in digital video format its
meetings and hearings, or portions thereof, that are required to be public
pursuant to article seven of the public officers law, provided that this
section shall not apply to community boards or local school boards. Such
recordings shall be webcast live, where practicable, and shall be archived
and made available to the public on the city's website or on the website of
such agency, committee, commission, task force, or council, not more than
seventy-two hours after adjournment of the meeting or hearing recorded.



Section 1064. Centralized contract and contractor information.



   a.   The mayor shall maintain, in a central place which is
accessible to the public, standard information regarding each city contract
and contractor. Such information shall include: (1) a copy of the contract;
(2) information regarding the method by which the contract was let; (3) such
standard documents as the contractor is required to submit, which documents
shall be updated regularly in accordance with rules of the procurement policy
board; (4) information regarding the contractor's qualifications and
performance; (5) any evaluations of the contractor and any contractor
responses to such evaluations; (6) any audits of the contract and any
contractor responses to such audits; and (7) any decisions regarding the
suspension or debarment of the contractor.



   b.   The procurement policy board shall regularly review the scope
and form of all information maintained pursuant to this section and shall
promulgate rules regarding its contents, organization and management.



   c.   The mayor shall ensure adequate public access to the
information on contracts and contractors, which shall be maintained in a
manner to facilitate public review, with due consideration for the need to
protect, where appropriate, the confidentiality of any such information.



   d.   The information on contracts and contractors shall be
computerized to the extent feasible. The computerized information shall be
stored in a manner which allows for meaningful read-only access to such
information by the agency name, contractor name, contract category, and
contract number included in prior notices published in the City Record
pursuant to section three hundred twenty-five. At least one computer terminal
shall be available for such access in the central place established by the
mayor pursuant to subdivision a of this section, and such access shall also
be provided to the public through the City’s website.



(Am. L.L. 2017/076, 5/10/2017, eff. 1/1/2019)



Section 1065. Budget documents.



   Each budget document required by chapters ten, six, or nine of the
charter shall be a public document. The official or agency responsible for
preparing each such document shall file a copy in the municipal reference and
research center, in the principal branch library of each borough and, for the
various geographic based budget documents, in the relevant branch library.
Copies of each such required budget document shall also be made available for
reasonable public inspection in the office of the official or agency
responsible for preparing it.



Section 1066. City Record.



   a.   There shall be published daily, except Saturdays, Sundays and
legal holidays, under contract or by the department of citywide
administrative services, a paper to be known as the City Record.



   b.   There shall be inserted in the City Record nothing aside from
such official matters as are expressly authorized.



   c.   All advertising required to be done for the city, except as
otherwise provided by law, shall be inserted at the public expense in the
City Record and a publication therein shall be sufficient compliance with any
law requiring publication of such matters or notices.



   d.   Nothing herein contained shall prevent the publication
elsewhere of any advertisement required by law to be so published.



   e.   The commissioner of citywide administrative services shall
cause a continuous series of the City Record to be bound as completed
quarterly and to be deposited with his or her certificate thereon in the
office of the city register, in the county clerk's office of each county and
in the office of the city clerk; and copies of the contents of any part of
the same, certified by such register, county clerk or city clerk, shall be
received in judicial proceedings as prima facie evidence of the truth of the
contents thereof.



   f.   The commissioner of citywide administrative services shall
provide copies of each issue of the City Record to the municipal reference
and research center where they shall be available without charge to any
member of the public requesting a copy on the publication date or within a
reasonable period of time thereafter, to be determined by the commissioner of
records and information services. The commissioner shall also provide free
subscriptions to the City Record to each borough president, council member,
community board, and branch of the public library and to the news media as
defined in paragraph three of subdivision b of section one thousand
forty-three of the charter. The commissioner of citywide administrative
services, each borough president, council member and community board shall,
upon receipt, make copies of each issue of the City Record available in their
respective offices for reasonable public inspection without charge.



   g.   All information published in the City Record after the
effective date of the local law that created this subdivision shall be
available as soon as possible, but no later than 24 hours of publishing, at
no charge on a website maintained by or on behalf of the city of New York as
well as on a single web portal that is linked to nyc.gov or any successor
website maintained by, or on behalf of, the city of New York created pursuant
to section 23-502 of the administrative code. Such information shall be
available in both a non-proprietary, machine-readable format and a
human-readable format and shall be capable of being downloaded in bulk. Such
information shall be searchable by, at minimum, date of publication, relevant
agency, keyword, and category, such as public hearings, procurement notices,
and changes in personnel.



Section 1067. Organization of the agency; notice.



   In January, nineteen hundred ninety and every year thereafter, in
accordance with the notice procedures of subdivision b of section one
thousand forty-three of this charter, the head of each agency shall cause to
be published in the City Record and shall give notice of a written plan or
chart describing the organization of the agency.



Section 1068. [Resolutions amending or extending charter.]



   The text of each resolution or similar action provided for by this
charter which has the force of law or which amends or extends the charter
shall appear as part of the administrative code or of the compilation of city
rules required by section one thousand forty-five, as the mayor deems
appropriate.



Section 1069. Access to public insurance coverage information.



   a.   Pursuant to the provisions of this section, each agency
designated as a participating agency under the provisions of this section
shall implement and administer a program of distribution of the public health
insurance program options pamphlet published by the department of health and
mental hygiene pursuant to section 17-183 of the administrative code of the
city of New York. The following offices are hereby designated as
participating agencies: the administration for children's services, the board
of education, the city clerk, the commission on human rights, the department
for the aging, the department of correction, the department of employment,
the department of homeless services, the department of housing preservation
and development, the department of juvenile justice, the department of health
and mental hygiene, the department of probation, the department of social
services/human resources administration, the taxi and limousine commission,
the department of youth and community development, the office to end domestic
and gender-based violence, and the office of immigrant affairs; provided,
however, that the department of health and mental hygiene, as it deems
appropriate, may designate additional agencies to be participating agencies.



   b.   Participating agencies shall be required to: (i) distribute
such public health insurance program options pamphlet to all persons
requesting a written application for services, renewal or recertification of
services or request for a change of address relating to the provision of
services by such agency; provided, however, that this section shall not apply
to services that must be provided to prevent actual or potential danger to
the life, health or safety of any individual or to the public (ii) include a
public health insurance program options pamphlet with any agency
communication sent through the United States mail for the purpose of
supplying an individual with a written application for services, renewal or
recertification of services or with a request for a change of address form
relating to the provision of services by such agency; and (iii) provide an
opportunity for an individual requesting a written application for services,
renewal or recertification for services or change of address form relating to
the provision of services by such agency via the Internet to request a public
health insurance program options pamphlet, and provide such pamphlet, by
United States mail or an Internet address where such pamphlet may be viewed
or downloaded, to any person who indicates via the Internet that they wish to
be sent a public health insurance program options pamphlet; provided,
however, that the taxi and limousine commission shall only be required to
distribute to public health insurance program options pamphlet to those
persons applying for or renewing a driver's license or vehicle license as
those terms are defined in section 19-502 of this code; and provided further,
that the board of education shall be required only to ensure that the public
health insurance program options pamphlet is distributed to those individuals
who appear in person to register a child in the public school system.



   c.   Participating agencies shall ensure that the employees of such
agency do not make any statement to an applicant for services or client or
take any action the purpose or effect of which is to lead the applicant or
client to believe that a decision to request public health insurance or a
public health insurance program options pamphlet has any bearing on their
eligibility to receive or the availability of services or benefits provided
by such agency.



   d.   Each participating agency shall request that any contractor of
such agency operating pursuant to a contract which (i) is in excess of two
hundred and fifty thousand dollars and (ii) requires such contractor to
supply individuals with a written application for, or written renewal or
recertification of services, or request for change of address form in the
daily administration of their contractual obligation to such participating
agency, fulfill the obligations of participating agencies under this section.



   e.   Each participating agency may establish procedures as they deem
necessary to implement the local law that added this section. The
commissioner or head of a participating agency, with the concurrence of the
commissioner of the department of health and mental hygiene, may exclude a
program in whole or in part from the requirements of this section upon
determining that the inclusion of such a program would not substantially
further the purpose of the local law that added this section. The
commissioner or head of each participating agency that administers programs
receiving funds under the workforce investment act of 1998, as codified at 29
U.S.C. § 2801 et seq., shall, with the concurrence of the commissioner of
the department of health and mental hygiene, determine which workforce
investment act offices providing workforce development services, including
core and intensive services or substantive training funded in whole or in
part by the city's share of funds provided under such workforce investment
act, shall be required to fulfill the obligations of participating agencies
under this section; such determination shall be based upon whether the
inclusion of such offices would substantially further the purpose of the
local law that added this section. A copy of each determination made pursuant
to this subdivision shall be forwarded to the council and the mayor within
thirty days of such determination.



(Am. L.L. 2019/038, 2/24/2019)



Section 1069.1. Distribution of pamphlet on public health insurance program
options in day care centers.



   Each day care center shall be required to distribute the pamphlet on
public health insurance program options provided to it by the department of
health and mental hygiene pursuant to subdivision b of section 17-183 of the
administrative code of the city of New York to those individuals who appear
in person to register a child in such day care center. Day care centers shall
also be required to ensure that pamphlets on public health insurance program
options are made available to parents and/or guardians on the premises of
such centers throughout the year. For the purposes of this section, "day care
center" shall mean any child day care facility operating in New York city
that is required to obtain a license from, or to register with, the
department of health and mental hygiene pursuant to section 47.05 of the New
York city health code and/or the New York state department of social services
pursuant to section 390 of the New York state social services law.



Chapter 48: Department of Information Technology and Telecommunications



Section 1070. Department; commissioner.



   There shall be a department of information technology and
telecommunications the head of which shall be the commissioner of information
technology and telecommunications and the chief information officer of the
city.



Section 1071. Deputies.



   The commissioner may appoint four deputies, one of whom may be
designated the first deputy commissioner.



Section 1072. Powers and duties of the department.



   Except as otherwise provided by law, the department shall have the
following powers and duties:



      a.   to plan, formulate, coordinate and advance information
technology and telecommunications policies for the city;



      b.   to develop, maintain and implement a long range
telecommunications strategy;



      c.   to administer all franchises and revocable consents
relating to telecommunications pursuant to the provisions of chapter
fourteen, including, without limitation, proposing authorizing resolutions
for telecommunications franchises, developing and issuing requests for
proposals or other solicitations of proposals for telecommunications
franchises, selecting telecommunications franchisees, reviewing and approving
petitions for revocable consents relating to telecommunications, negotiating
the terms of contracts or other agreements relating to telecommunications
franchises and revocable consents, and enforcing the terms and conditions of
such agreements;



      d.   to develop municipal uses of cable television and
coordinate interagency uses of cable television and other telecommunications;



      e.   to ensure that priority is given on at least one
municipal channel to the cable casting of the public proceedings of the
council and its committees, the city planning commission and other state and
city agencies;



      f.   to provide to city agencies such land-based and wireless
voice, data, video or other communications facilities, and technical
assistance or other assistance with respect to such facilities, as they may
require for the effective discharge of their responsibilities;



      g.   to participate in developing, maintaining and
implementing a long-range computer system and data communications strategy
for the city of New York;



      h.   to assist in providing interagency coordination on
matters related to data communications activities and interfacing of
computers;



      i.   to provide appropriate, reliable, cost-effective and
responsive computer and data communications services to agencies that require
such services by purchasing and maintaining hardware, software and such other
goods and services as may be necessary to effectively discharge the powers
and duties of the department;



      j.   to provide assistance to agencies in meeting their data
processing and data communications objectives;



      k.   to provide agencies using or proposing to use the
services of this department with technical assistance in determining
feasibility and resource requirements;



      l.   to simplify access to shared information, reduce
communication costs and provide access to multiple computer systems by
connecting computers and terminals of various city agencies, and of other
public entities requesting such connection where such provision to such other
entities would in the judgment of the commissioner be in the city's interests;



      m.   to plan and provide telecommunications coordination in
support of disaster recovery;



      n.   to ensure security for data and other information handled
by this department;



      o.   to institute procedures to assure restrictions of access
to information to the appropriate individuals, where such restrictions is
required by law;



      p.   to perform such other responsibilities with respect to
information technology and telecommunications matters, including
responsibilities delegated elsewhere by the charter, as the mayor shall
direct;



      q.   to provide to the public at no charge on the city's
website an interactive map, updated as often as practicable and necessary but
not less than once per week, displaying the following:



         1.   Permitted and approved street closures that do not
allow for the passage of vehicular traffic on that street, including but not
limited to closures for special events, crane operations and other
construction work, film shoots and paving operations; and



         2.   Parking regulations. The information related to
paragraph (1) of this subdivision shall be searchable and sortable by time,
date and borough, except that street closures for crane operations,
construction work and paving operations shall have the notation "subject to
closure" during times where closure has been permitted and approved but where
such closure may or may not occur on a particular day. All information
required by this subdivision shall be available on the city's website as soon
as practicable but in no case less than one week prior to any such closure or
change, except closures which were applied for or planned less than one week
prior to any such closure or change, which shall be available on such
interactive map within seventy-two hours of the permit and approval of such
closure. Where a permitted and approved street closure is due to a special
event, the sponsor of the event with appropriate contact information shall be
provided as part of such interactive map. For the purposes of this
subdivision, special event shall mean any street fair, block party or
festival on a public street(s) where such activity may interfere with or
obstruct the normal use by vehicular traffic of such street(s); and



      r.   to provide to the public, at no charge on the city's
website, an interactive crime map that, for each segment of a street bounded
by one or more intersections and/or a terminus, shall visually display the
aggregate monthly, yearly and year-to-date totals for the current and the
most recent prior calendar years for each class of crime that is reported to
the New York city police department, or for which an arrest was made,
including crimes that occurred in parks and subway stations. Such map shall
be searchable by address, zip code, and patrol precinct. All information
required by this subdivision shall be available on the city's website as soon
as practicable but in no case more than one month after a crime complaint has
been filed. The mayor shall ensure that all agencies provide the department
with such assistance and information as the department requires to compile
and update the interactive crime map.



Section 1073. [Emergency communications systems of other agencies.]



   With respect to emergency communications systems and emergency
communications facilities administered by another agency, the department
shall exercise its powers and duties only as the mayor shall direct pursuant
to subdivision p of section 1072 of this chapter, or at the request of such
agency.



Section 1074. Telecommunications.



   "Telecommunications" shall mean the transmission of writings, signals,
pictures, numbers and sounds or intelligence of all kinds by aid of wire,
cable, optical fiber, radio, satellite, electromagnetic wave, microwave or
other like connection between points of origin and reception of such
transmission, including all instrumentalities, facilities, apparatus and
services incidental to such transmission.



Section 1075. 311 citizen service center reports.



   a.   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the term
"department" shall mean the department of information technology and
telecommunications. The term "directory assistance call" shall mean any call
received by the 311 citizen service center that is entered into the 311
computer system in the directory assistance category. The term "request for
service" shall mean any call received by the 311 citizen service center that
is entered into the 311 computer system in the request for service category.



   b.   Within seven business days from the end of each month, the
department shall submit in electronic format to the speaker of the council,
the public advocate and each community board, and shall make available on the
city's official website, a report regarding requests for service received by
the 311 citizen service center since April 1, 2004, disaggregated on a
month-by-month and fiscal year-by-year basis. Such report shall include, but
not be limited to, the following information: (1) the total number of
requests for service received in each request for service category by each
agency or agencies to which the requests for service were directed; (2) the
total number of requests for service received in each resolution status
category by each request for service category and by each agency or agencies
to which the requests for service were directed, where such information can
be directly accessed by the 311 citizen service system; and (3) the average
resolution time for each request for service category by the agency or
agencies to which requests for service were directed, where such information
can be directly accessed by the 311 citizen service system. The data
contained in the report shall be provided citywide and disaggregated by zip
code, community district, council district and borough.



   c.   Within seven business days from the end of each month, the
department shall submit in electronic format to the speaker of the council,
the public advocate and each community board and shall make available on the
city's official website a report regarding directory assistance calls
received by the 311 citizen service center since April 1, 2004, disaggregated
on a month-by-month and fiscal year-by-year basis. Such report shall include,
but not be limited to, the following information: the total number of
directory assistance calls received for each directory assistance category by
each agency or agencies to which the directory assistance calls were directed.



   d.   Within seven business days from the end of each month, the
department shall submit in electronic format to each community board a list
setting forth all requests for service that were identified to have occurred
in the respective community district received by the 311 citizen service
center during the immediately preceding month, as well as all unresolved
requests for service from prior months. Such report shall include, but not be
limited to, the following information for each request for service: (1) the
request for service category; (2) the agency or agencies to which the request
for service was directed; and, (3) the current status of the request for
service, where such information can be directly accessed by the 311 citizen
service system.



   e.   The department shall convene a quarterly meeting of
representatives from each of the community boards within the city to discuss
the content and format of the reports required to be prepared pursuant to
this chapter.



Chapter 49: Officers and Employees



Section 1100. Head of department; whole time.



   Every head of an administration or department or elected officer who
receives a salary from the city shall give his or her whole time to the
duties of the office and shall not engage in any other occupation, profession
or employment.



(Am. L.L. 2016/020, 2/19/2016)



Section 1101. Deputies.



   a.   Any head of a department established by this charter may
appoint, and at pleasure, remove so many deputies as may be provided for by
law and determine their relative rank, and may appoint and at pleasure remove
a secretary to the department if so provided, and, except as otherwise
provided by law, shall assign to them their duties and may by instrument in
writing filed in the department designate any deputy to possess any of the
powers and exercise such of the duties of the head of the department and for
such times and under such conditions as such head of a department may specify.



   b.   During a vacancy in the office of the head of an administration
or a department established by this charter, or whenever by reason of illness
or absence from the city such official shall be prevented from attending to
the duties of office, the highest ranking deputy not absent of under
disability shall act as the head of the administration or department.



   c.   The head of each mayoral department, including each such
department within an administration, shall designate a deputy commissioner of
the department or a senior officer reporting directly to the head of the
department who shall be responsible for the personnel, management and budget
administration functions of the department and for financial planning and
management in the areas of payroll, purchasing, vouchering, accounting and
related areas assigned by the head of the department.



Section 1102. Organization of department.



   a.   Any head of an administration or a department established by
this charter, to the extent to which the organization of the administration
or department is not prescribed by law, shall by instrument in writing filed
in the agency organize the administration or department into such divisions,
bureaus or offices and make such assignments of powers and duties among them,
and from time to time change such organization or assignments, as the head of
the administration or department may consider advisable.



   b.   Except as provided in section eleven, where divisions, bureaus
or offices have been established by law, the mayor may consolidate any two or
more divisions, bureaus or offices in any agency under the jurisdiction of
the mayor and change the duties of any such division, bureau or office and in
like manner reverse or modify any such action.



Section 1109. Summary inquiry.



   A summary inquiry into any alleged violation or neglect of duty in
relation to the property, government or affairs of the city may be conducted
under an order to be made by any justice of the supreme court in the first,
second or eleventh judicial district on application of the mayor, the
comptroller, the public advocate, any five council members, the commissioner
of investigation or any five citizens who are taxpayers, supported by
affidavit to the effect that one or more officers, employees or other persons
therein named have knowledge or information concerning such alleged violation
or neglect of duty. Such inquiry shall be conducted before and shall be
controlled by the justice making the order or any other justice of the
supreme court in the same district. Such justice may require any officer or
employee or any other person to attend and be examined in relation to the
subject of the inquiry. Any answers given by a witness in such inquiry shall
not be used against such witness in any criminal proceeding, except that for
all false answers on material points such witness shall be subject to
prosecution for perjury. The examination shall be reduced to writing and
shall be filed in the office of the clerk of such county within the first,
second or eleventh judicial district as the justice may direct, and shall be
a public record.



Section 1110. Trusteeship of public property.



   The council and the council members and all other officers and
employees of the city are hereby declared respectively trustees of the
property, funds and effects of the city, so far as such property, funds and
effects are or may be committed to their management or control. Such trustees
are hereby made subject to all the duties and responsibilities imposed by law
on trustees, and such duties and responsibilities may be enforced by the city
or by any officer thereof.



Section 1110-a. Capital plant inventory and maintenance estimates.



   a.   For the purposes of this section:



      1.   "Maintenance" or "maintain" shall denote those activities
necessary to keep the relevant portion of the capital plant in good repair so
as to preserve its structural integrity and to prevent its deterioration.



      2.   "Major portion of the capital plant" shall mean (a) any
capital asset (1) which is a capital facility or system comprising a
component of the public domain or infrastructure general fixed assets of the
city or a building comprising a component of the general fixed assets of the
city and (2) which, as of December thirty-first, nineteen hundred
eighty-eight, or, as the result of any reconstruction or expansion after such
date, has a replacement cost of at least ten million dollars and a useful
life of at least ten years, or if purchased or constructed after such date,
has an original cost of at least ten million dollars, and an original useful
life of at least ten years; and (b) any other capital asset of the city
designated by the mayor for the purposes of this section; provided, however,
that it shall not include any asset which is leased to or otherwise under the
cognizance and control of a public benefit corporation or which is otherwise
covered, pursuant to state law, by requirements which are substantially
similar to the requirements of this section.



   b.   Not later than October first of nineteen hundred eighty-nine,
the head of each agency shall submit to the mayor, for each major portion of
the capital plant for which the agency or any officer or employee thereof is
responsible, the following information: the date of original acquisition or
construction, the dates of any significant alterations or reconstructions,
the original cost and original useful life, and the current replacement cost
and remaining useful life. Such information shall be categorized by project
type.



   c.   Not later than October first of nineteen hundred ninety, the
head of each agency shall submit to the mayor an agency capital plant
inventory presenting, for each major portion of the capital plant for which
the agency or any officer or employee thereof is responsible, an update of
the information required by subdivision b of this section as well as an
assessment of its condition and a schedule, by year, of maintenance
activities. The head of each agency shall submit amendments of such agency
capital plant inventory to the mayor as necessary to ensure that such
inventory, including the condition assessments and maintenance schedules, is
complete, current and accurate. Such inventory and amendments thereto shall
be categorized by project type.



   d.   Such maintenance schedules and amendments thereto, other than
amendments reflecting the disposition or demolition of any portion of the
capital plant, shall be prepared or reviewed by professional engineers or
architects registered in the state of New York and such engineers or
architects shall set forth in writing (1) their opinions as to the
reasonableness and sufficiency of the activities set forth in such schedules
for maintaining such portions of the capital plant and (2) their
recommendations, if any, for changes in such schedules. Such opinions and
recommendations shall be based upon commonly used standards for acceptable
levels of maintenance, the performance and other specifications to which such
portions of the capital plant were designed, and such other engineering or
architectural standards as may be appropriate. Such professional engineers or
architects may be officers or employees of the city of New York.



   e.   The mayor shall transmit copies of such agency capital plant
inventories, and all amendments thereto, to the council, the comptroller and
the city planning commission and shall ensure that all information from such
inventories as amended, including the condition assessments and maintenance
schedules, and the opinions and recommendations related to such maintenance
schedules are centrally stored and accessible to such officials, the agencies
involved and other interested parties.



   f.   Not later than the first day of October of each year,
commencing in nineteen hundred ninety, the mayor shall transmit to the
council estimates for the ensuing fiscal year and for each of the three
succeeding fiscal years of the amounts, by agency and project type and,
within project type, by personal services and other-than-personal services,
necessary to maintain all major portions of the capital plant, consistent
with the maintenance schedules on file with the mayor pursuant to subdivision
e of this section. Such estimates shall be prepared or reviewed by the
professional engineers or architects who prepared or reviewed such
maintenance schedules or by professional engineers or architects registered
in the State of New York and employed by the office of management and budget
or the agencies involved. Such architects or engineers shall set forth in
writing (1) their opinions as to the reasonableness of such estimates and
whether such estimates have been logically derived from such maintenance
schedules and (2) their recommendations, if any, for changes in such
estimates. Such opinions and recommendations shall be centrally stored and
accessible to any interested party.



Section 1111. Authorization to incur liabilities; expenses not to exceed
appropriation.



   The head of each agency shall establish the procedure by which charges
and liabilities may be incurred on behalf of the agency. Such procedures
shall ensure that no officer or employee, on behalf of or in the name of the
agency, shall incur a liability or an expense for any purpose in excess of
the amount appropriated or otherwise authorized therefor; and no charge,
claim or liability shall exist or arise against the city, or any of the
counties contained within its territorial limits, for any sum in excess of
the amount appropriated or otherwise authorized for the particular purpose.



Section 1112. Reports to mayor.



   The heads of administrations and departments established by this
charter, borough presidents and such officers as the mayor may require shall
in addition to any other reports required by this charter, once in each year
and at such other times as the mayor may direct, make to the mayor, in such
form and under such rules as the mayor may prescribe, reports of their
operations and action. Notice of the availability of copies of each of such
annual reports shall be published in the City Record within thirty days of
the publication of the report involved. The heads of all agencies shall, when
required by the mayor, furnish to him or her such information as the mayor
may demand, within such reasonable time as he or she may direct.



Section 1113. Report and Advisory Board Review Commission.



   a.   Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of this charter, the
administrative code or any local law and except as provided in this section,
any requirement in this charter, the administrative code or otherwise in any
local law that mandates the issuance of periodic or multiple reports by
public agencies, officers or employees where at least one such report is due
on or after the effective date of this section, and any requirement that
mandates the establishment of a commission, committee, board, task force or
other similar body that is solely advisory in nature, shall be subject to
waiver in accordance with the provisions of this section.



   b.   There shall be a report and advisory board review commission,
which shall consist of the speaker of the city council, two members of the
council to be chosen by the speaker, the corporation counsel, the director of
the mayor's office of operations, the director of management and budget, and
the commissioner of information technology and telecommunications or
designated officers or employees of the agencies headed by such members or in
the case of the council members, designated employees of the council. The
director of the mayor's office of operations shall be the chair of the
commission.



   c.   The commission shall meet on a regular basis, at intervals
determined by the chair, to perform the reviews required by this section. The
commission shall hold at least one public hearing each year to solicit
comment from members of the public on matters required to be reviewed by the
commission pursuant to this section. The chair shall have charge of the
organization of the commission and shall have authority to employ, assign and
superintend the duties of such officers and employees as may be necessary to
carry out the provisions of this section. In addition, the speaker of the
city council, the commissioner or head of any agency or office represented on
the commission or the commissioner or head of any other appropriate city
agency or office may, if requested by the chair or the commission, provide
staff and other assistance with respect to any matter within the jurisdiction
of the commission.



   d.   (1)    Except as provided in paragraph six of this
subdivision, the commission shall have the power and responsibility to review
all requirements in this charter or the administrative code or elsewhere in
the local laws of New York city that mandate the issuance of periodic or
multiple reports by city agencies, officers or employees where at least one
such report is due on or after the effective date of this section, and all
requirements that mandate the establishment of commissions, committees,
boards, task forces or other similar bodies that are solely advisory in
nature. Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of this charter, the
administrative code or any local law, the commission shall further have the
power and responsibility, subject to review by the council and the mayor as
provided in paragraphs four and five of this subdivision, and except as
provided in paragraph six of this subdivision, to waive any such requirement.
The commission shall be empowered to review requirements in effect on and
after the effective date of this section regardless of the date of enactment
of such requirements; provided, however, that the powers and duties of the
commission shall not extend to the mayor's management report required
pursuant to subdivision c of section twelve of this charter as in effect on
July first, two thousand ten, or to requirements mandating the issuance of
reports, or the creation of bodies, that are required pursuant to any state
or federal law, rule or regulation or that are both (i) in effect on July
first, two thousand ten and (ii) set forth in or required by sections
ninety-three, ninety-five or ninety-six, or by chapters six, nine, ten or
eleven of this charter.



      (2)   Prior to making any determination to waive a requirement
pursuant to this section, the commission shall, to the extent practicable,
solicit the views of groups, organizations, or entities representing the
interests of persons and entities that the chair or the commission reasonably
determines are the subject of or are otherwise affected or benefited by the
requirement under review. Any such determination made by the commission shall
include a statement that the commission has solicited input in accordance
with this paragraph.



      (3)   The commission shall review all requirements within its
jurisdiction. Except as provided in this subdivision, the chair may establish
the agenda and priorities of the commission with respect to the order in
which the commission reviews requirements and with respect to similar
matters. Upon completing its review of each such requirement, the commission
shall issue a written determination whether or not to waive such requirement
and, if the commission determines such requirement shall be waived, stating
the reasons therefor. A report waived by the commission, subject to the
review process set forth in paragraphs four and five of this subdivision,
shall cease to be required. In the event that the commission determines to
waive the requirement that mandates the establishment of an advisory body, if
such waiver is approved by the council and the mayor pursuant to the
provisions of this section, such body shall cease to exist following such
approval. The commission may waive a reporting requirement in part rather
than in whole by identifying particular required elements of such report that
should be waived or retained. The commission shall issue determinations with
respect to requirements that are in effect on the date of adoption of this
section no later than November first, two thousand fifteen, and shall issue
determinations with respect to requirements enacted after such date of
adoption no later than five years after the date of enactment of such
requirements. The commission may from time to time make further
determinations with respect to the waiver of any such requirement; provided,
however, that when a requirement has been retained by the commission or as a
result of the review process set forth in paragraphs four and five of this
subdivision, the commission shall again review such requirement within five
years of the date of the determination to retain the requirement.



      (4)   The commission shall promptly file with the council and
the mayor, publish in the city record and post on the city website each
determination to waive a requirement, whether in part or in whole, that is
issued pursuant to paragraph three of this subdivision, and shall promptly
provide copies of such determination electronically or by any other
reasonable means to groups, organizations or entities from which the
commission has solicited input in accordance with paragraph two of this
subdivision. Within one hundred twenty days of the filing of a determination
by the commission, the council may either approve or disapprove such
determination by the affirmative vote of a majority of all the council
members. If, at the end of such one hundred twenty days, the council has
failed to act on a determination of the commission, the council shall be
deemed to have approved such determination, and such determination shall take
effect.



      (5)   All actions of the council pursuant to this subdivision
shall be filed by the council with the mayor prior to the expiration of the
time period for council action under paragraph four of this subdivision. Any
approval by the council pursuant to this subdivision, whether as a result of
council action or failure to act, shall be final. Any disapproval by the
council pursuant to this subdivision shall be final unless the mayor within
ten days of receiving a filing with respect to such action files with the
council a written disapproval of the action. A mayoral disapproval pursuant
to this paragraph shall have the effect of vetoing any council disapproval
and shall be subject to override by a two-thirds vote of all the council
members within fifteen days of such filing by the mayor.



      (6)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, in
no event shall the commission make a determination to waive a requirement
otherwise subject to its jurisdiction for three years following the date of
enactment of the most recent local law imposing any such requirement.



   e.   The commission shall base its reviews and determinations on
such criteria as it may deem appropriate. Such criteria shall include but not
be limited to the following:



      (1)   With regard to requirements mandating the issuance of
reports: whether the report provides useful information for evaluating the
results of programs, activities and functions and their effectiveness in
achieving their goals and objectives; whether the report provides useful
information for assessing the effectiveness of the management of city
resources; whether the report is entirely or partially duplicative of the
subject matter of any other mandated report; whether the report remains
relevant in light of changing circumstances, current information needs and
technological advances; and whether the benefits and usefulness of the report
outweigh the expenditure of public resources to produce it.



      (2)   With regard to requirements mandating the establishment
of advisory commissions, committees, boards, task forces or other similar
bodies: whether the body substantially furthers the mission of city agencies
with which it interacts or within which it is located; whether the function
or jurisdiction of a body is entirely or partly duplicative of the function
or jurisdiction of any other mandated body; whether the function or
jurisdiction of a body is limited to the production of reports that have been
waived pursuant to this section; whether the function or jurisdiction of a
body remains relevant in light of changing circumstances and needs; and
whether the benefits and usefulness of the body outweigh the expenditure of
public resources to support and interact with it.



   f.   In addition to the powers set forth in subdivisions a through e
of this section, the commission may recommend to the mayor and the council
the modification of existing requirements with respect to the issuance of
reports and the establishment of solely advisory bodies in order to make the
implementation of such requirements more effective in achieving their
intended purposes; such recommendations may include, but not be limited to
recommendations designed to modify or consolidate reporting requirements in
light of technological advances, and may also evaluate, and make
recommendations to the mayor and the council concerning, additional data
needs.



   g.   Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the city
council from acting by local law to limit or repeal any requirement otherwise
subject to this section at any time, or to enhance or extend such
requirement. Any such enhancement or extension shall be subject to commission
review pursuant to this section, provided, however, that such review is
limited by the three-year period set forth in paragraph six of subdivision d.



Section 1115. Officer not to hold any other civil office.



   Any person holding office, whether by election or appointment, who
shall, during such person's term of office, accept, hold or retain any other
other civil office of honor, trust or emolument under the government of the
United States, except commissioners for the taking of bail, or of the state,
except the office of notary public or commissioner of deeds or officer of the
national guard, or who shall hold or accept any other office connected with
the government of the city, or who shall accept a seat in the legislature,
shall be deemed thereby to have vacated any office held by such person under
the city government; except that the mayor may accept, or may in writing
authorize any other person holding office to accept, a specified civil office
in respect to which no salary or other compensation is provided. No person
shall hold two city or county offices, except as expressly provided in this
charter or by statute; nor shall any officer under the city government hold
or retain an office under a county government, except when such officer holds
such office ex officio by virtue of an act of the legislature, and in such
case shall draw no salary for such ex officio; provided, however, that any
member of the police force or any member of the fire department may hold
office as a member of a board of education outside of the city of New York if
otherwise qualified to serve thereon.



Section 1116. Fraud; neglect of duty; willful violation of law relative to
office.



   a.   Any council member or other officer or employee of the city who
shall wilfully violate or evade any provision of law relating to such
officer's office or employment, or commit any fraud upon the city, or convert
any of the public property to such officer's own use, or knowingly permit any
other person so to convert it or by gross or culpable neglect of duty allow
the same to be lost to the city, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and
in addition to the penalties imposed by law and on conviction shall forfeit
such office or employment, and be excluded forever after from receiving or
holding any office or employment under the city government.



   b.   Any officer or employee of the city or of any city agency who
shall knowingly make a false or deceptive report or statement in the course
of duty shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, forfeit such
office or employment.



Section 1117. Pensioner not to hold office.



   If a person receiving a pension or a retirement allowance made up of
such pension and an annuity purchased by the pensioner from the city or any
agency, or out of any fund under the city or any agency, by reason of such
person's own prior employment by the city or any agency, shall hold and
receive any compensation from any office, employment or position under the
state or city or any of the counties included within the city or any
municipal corporation or political subdivision of the state, except the
offices of inspector of election, poll clerk or ballot clerk under the
election law or commissioner of deeds or notary public or jury duty, the
payment of said pension only shall be suspended and forfeited during and for
the time such person shall hold and receive compensation from such office,
position or employment; but this section shall not apply where the pension
and the salary or compensation of the office, employment or position amount
in the aggregate to less than one thousand eight hundred dollars annually.



Section 1118. Officers and employees not to be ordered to work outside public
employment.



   No officer or employee of the city or of any of the counties within its
limits shall detail or cause any officer or employee of the city or of any of
such counties to do or perform any service or work outside of the public
office, work or employment of such officer or employee; and any violation of
this section shall constitute a misdemeanor.



Section 1119. Action of boards.



   Except as otherwise provided by law:



      1.   Whenever any act is authorized to be done or any
determination or decision made by any commission, board or other body, the
act, determination or decisions of the majority of the commission, board or
other body shall be held to be the act, determination or decision of the
commission, board or other body.



      2.   A majority of the members of any commission, board or
other body shall constitute a quorum of such commission, board or other body.



      3.   Each commission, board or other body may choose at its
own pleasure one of its members who shall be its president and one who shall
be its treasurer and may appoint a secretary or chief clerk within the
appropriation therefor.



Section 1120. Additional powers and duties.



   Any elected or appointed officer of the city or any board or commission
or any member thereof shall, in addition to the powers and duties vested in
such officer, board or commission by this charter, perform any duties and
exercise any powers vested in such officer or in such board or commission by
any other provision of law and any power necessary to carry out the powers
and duties vested in such officer, board or commission.



Section 1121. Agreements concerning performance of agency administrative
functions.



   Notwithstanding any other provision of local law to the contrary, two
or more agencies of the city may, by mutual agreement, share in the
performance of specified administrative functions or designate one or more of
such agencies to perform such functions for one or more other such agencies
if, in the judgment of the heads of such agencies, such sharing or
designation will result in more effective or efficient performance of such
functions for the agencies entering into such agreement. An agreement
pursuant to this section may include but shall not be limited to the sharing
of, or designation of one or more agencies to perform, one or more of the
following functions: personnel services, labor relations, facilities
maintenance and management, purchasing, information technology and
telecommunications, budget administration, and internal auditing. For
purposes of this section, "agencies of the city" shall include but not be
limited to mayoral and non-mayoral agencies, city boards and commissions, and
the offices of elected city officers.



Section 1122. Bonds.



   Unless otherwise provided by law, each officer of the city who has
possession of or control over any funds of the city shall give bond for the
faithful performance of the duties of such officer in such sum as may be
fixed and with sureties to be approved by the comptroller. Such bonds shall
run to the city of New York, and in case there is another officer who is
responsible for the officer giving the bond, shall run also to such officer.



Section 1123. Failure to testify.



   If any council member or other officer or employee of the city shall,
after lawful notice or process, wilfully refuse or fail to appear before any
court or judge, any legislative committee, or any officer, board or body
authorized to conduct any hearing or inquiry, or having appeared shall refuse
to testify or to answer any question regarding the property, government or
affairs of the city or of any county included within its territorial limits,
or regarding the nomination, election, appointment or official conduct of any
officer or employee of the city or of any such county, on the ground that the
answer of such council member, officer or employee would tend to incriminate
him or her, or shall refuse to waive immunity from prosecution on account of
any such matter in relation to which he or she may be asked to testify upon
any such hearing or inquiry, the term or tenure of office or employment of
such council member, officer or employee shall terminate and such office or
employment shall be vacant, and he or she shall not be eligible to election
or appointment to any office or employment under the city or any agency.



Section 1124. Civil rights protected.



   Nothing in this charter contained shall affect any rights given or
secured by section fifteen of the civil rights law, including the right of
officers and employees, as citizens, to appeal to the legislature or to any
public officer, board, commission or other public body for the redress of
their grievances as such officers and employees.



Section 1125. Salaries of the district attorneys.



   Each of the district attorneys of the counties of New York, Bronx,
Kings, Queens and Richmond shall receive an annual salary equal to the
compensation received by a justice of the supreme court in the county in
which such district attorney has been elected and is serving, or two hundred
twelve thousand eight hundred dollars a year, whichever is greater.



(Am. L.L. 2016/019, 2/19/2016, retro. eff. 1/1/2016)



Section 1126. Political activities forbidden.



   No officer or employee of the department of citywide administrative
services subject to this provision pursuant to a designation of the
commissioner of citywide administrative services, and no member, officer, or
employee of the civil service commission shall hold office or serve as a
member of any committee in any political organization or association, nor
shall such member, officer or employee serve as a delegate to any political
convention. Any member, officer or employee violating this provision shall
forfeit such office or employment. The commissioner of citywide
administrative services shall designate all employees in the department of
citywide administrative services who perform functions relating to citywide
personnel issues to be subject to this provision.



Section 1127. Condition precedent to employment.



   a.   Notwithstanding the provisions of any local law, rule or
regulation to the contrary, every person seeking employment with the city of
New York or any of its agencies regardless of civil service classification or
status shall sign an agreement as a condition precedent to such employment to
the effect that if such person is or becomes a nonresident individual as that
term is defined in section 11-1706 of the administrative code of the city of
New York or any similar provision of such code, during employment by the
city, such person will pay to the city an amount by which a city personal
income tax on residents computed and determined as if such person were a
resident individual, as defined in such section, during such employment,
exceeds the amount of any city earnings tax and city personal income tax
imposed on such person for the same taxable period.



   b.   Whenever any provision of this charter, the administrative code
of the city of New York or any rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to
such charter or administrative code employs the term "salary",
"compensation", or any other word or words having a similar meaning, such
terms shall be deemed and construed to mean the scheduled salary or
compensation of any employee of the city of New York, undiminished by any
amount payable pursuant to subdivision a of this section.



Section 1128. Interference with investigation.



   a.   No person vent, seek to prevent, interfere with, obstruct, or
otherwise hinder any study or investigation being conducted pursuant to the
charter. Any violation of this section shall constitute cause for suspension
or removal from office or employment.



   b.   Full cooperation with the commissioner of investigation shall
be afforded by every officer or employee of the city or other persons.



Section 1129. Members of police department; no other office.



   Any police commissioner or any member of the police force who shall
accept any additional place of public trust or civil emolument except as a
member of a community board, or who shall during his or her term of office be
nominated for any office elective by the people, except a member of the
police force appointed, nominated or elected to a board of education outside
of the city of New York, and shall not, within ten days succeeding same,
decline the said nomination, shall be deemed thereby to have resigned his or
her commission and to have vacated his or her office, and all votes cast at
any election for any person holding the office of police commissioner, or
within thirty days after he or she shall have resigned such office, shall be
void.



   The foregoing provisions shall not apply to any member of the police
force who, with the written authorization of the mayor, shall accept any
additional place of public trust or civil emolument while on leave of absence
without pay from the department.



Section 1130. Members of fire department; elective office.



   Any commissioner or any member of the uniformed force of the fire
department may accept any additional place of public trust or civil emolument
or may be elected to public office. Provided, however, if the fire
commissioner determines that serving in such capacity interferes with his or
her performance as a member of the department, the commissioner may require
that such member be on a leave of absence without pay from the department
during the time that such member holds such office.



Section 1131. School officers not to be interested in contracts; removal.



   The board of education shall have the power to remove from office any
school officer who shall have been directly or indirectly interested in the
furnishing of any supplies or materials, or in the doing of any work or
labor, or in the sale or leasing of any real estate, or in any proposal,
agreement or contract for any of these purposes, in any case in which the
price or consideration is to be paid, in whole or in part, directly or
indirectly, out of any school moneys, or who shall have received from any
source whatever any commission or compensation in connection with any of the
matters aforesaid; and any school officer who shall violate the preceding
provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall
also forfeit such office and be ineligible to any office or employment under
the board of education or under the city or any agency. The provisions of
this section shall not apply to authors of school books used in any of the
public schools because of any interest they may have as authors in such books.



Section 1132. Contributions to political funds, etc., prohibited.



   Neither the city superintendent of schools, nor any associate or
assistant superintendent of schools, nor any member of the board of
examiners, nor any member of the supervising or teaching staff of the board
of education of the city shall be permitted to contribute any moneys directly
or indirectly to any fund intended to affect legislation increasing their
emoluments, but nothing herein shall be construed to deny any right afforded
by section eleven hundred twenty-four.



Section 1133. Transmission of reports; disposal of records; destruction of
other materials.



   a.   The head of each agency shall transmit to the municipal
reference and research library, in electronic format each report, document,
study and publication required by local law, executive order, or mayoral
directive to be published, issued ore transmitted to the council or mayor,
together with metadata identified by the department of records and
information services, within ten business days of such publication, issuance
or transmittal to the council or mayor, which materials shall be made
available to the public on or through the department's website, or its
successor agency's website, within ten business days of such publication,
issuance or transmittal to the council or mayor. The agency shall further
transmit within ten business days of release by the agency, in electronic
format, to the department of records and information services each report,
document or study prepared by consultants or other independent contractors,
together with metadata identified by the department of records and
information services. Such materials shall further be made available to the
public on or through the department's website, or its successor's website,
within ten business days of release by the agency. Where practicable, each
agency shall also transmit, in electronic format, to the department of
records and information services or its successor agency all other published
material and any report, document, study and publication required to be
published by any state or federal law, rule or regulation, together with
metadata identified by the department of records and information services.
Such materials shall further be made available to the public on or through
the department's website, or its successor's website, within ten business
days of such publication.



   b.   Effective July 1, 2019, the department of records and
information services, or its successor agency, shall maintain a list on its
website of all reports, documents, studies and publications required by local
law, executive order, or mayoral directive to be published, issued, or
transmitted to the council or mayor. Such list shall provide:



      1.   the title of each such report, document, study or
publication;



      2.   the agency or agencies primarily responsible for
preparing such report, document, study or publication;



      3.   the frequency with which such report, document, study or
publication is required to be published, issued or transmitted;



      4.   the date on which the last such report, document, study
or publication was published by the agency; and



      5.   effective January 1, 2020, for each such report,
document, study or publication listed pursuant to this subdivision, a link to
the location of every instance of such report, document, study or
publication, as received and posted pursuant to subdivisions a and c, and
every request for such report, document, study or publication, as posted
pursuant to subdivision d, provided that if such link is to a searchable
portal then such link shall automatically execute the relevant search for the
user.



   c.   For every instance of a report, document, study or publication
listed pursuant to subdivision b and received by the department of records
and information services, such website shall provide:



      1.   access to a copy of such report, document, study or
publication;



      2.   a citation to any local law number, section of the
charter, section of the administrative code, or section of any other law to
which such report, document, study or publication is intended to be
responsive, as provided pursuant to section 1134, if any;



      3.   the agency or agencies that prepared such report,
document, study or publication; and



      4.   the date or reporting period for which such report,
document, study or publication is intended to be responsive, if any.



   d.   The department of records and information services, or its
successor agency, shall request the transmission pursuant to the requirements
of this section of any report, document, study or publication required by
local law, executive order, or mayoral directive to be published, issued, or
transmitted to the council or mayor that is not received by the department,
or its successor agency, within ten business days of the due date for such
report, document, study or publication pursuant to the local law, executive
order, or mayoral directive that requires the publishing, issuance or
transmittal of such report, document, study or publication. The department,
or its successor agency, shall make such request available on or through its
website in place of the report, document, study or publication that has not
been received.



   e.   By January 31 of each calendar year, the department of records
and information services or its successor agency shall notify each agency of
the reports that the department expects to receive from the agency during
that calendar year.



   f.   No records shall be destroyed or otherwise disposed of by an
agency, officer or employee of the city unless approval has been obtained
from the commissioner of records and information services, the corporation
counsel and the head of the agency which created or has jurisdiction over the
records who shall base their determinations on the potential administrative,
fiscal, legal, research or historical value of the record. Approval for
records disposal shall be contained in an approved records disposal schedule
and remain in force until the status of the records changes. The commissioner
of records and information services or the head of the agency which created
or has jurisdiction over the records may initiate action to eliminate records
eligible for disposal. The commissioner of records and information services
shall insure the destruction of disposable records within six months of the
date of eligibility.



   g.   Records of historical, research, cultural or other important
value shall be transferred to the municipal archives for permanent custody
pursuant to a records disposition schedule approved by the commissioner of
records and information services and, if applicable, the head of the agency
which created or has jurisdiction over the records. Such schedule is subject
to the conditions set forth herein. The city shall reserve and retain
ownership, possession, and control of all records of historical, research,
cultural or other important value in accordance with the provisions of this
section and subdivision five of section 3003.



   h.   Other materials not included within the definition of records
in this charter may be destroyed, if not otherwise prohibited by law, at any
time by the agency in possession of such materials without the approval of
the commissioner of records and information services. Such commissioner may,
however, formulate procedures and interpretations to guide in the disposition
of such materials.



(Am. L.L. 2019/029, 2/9/2019, eff. 6/9/2019)



Section 1134. [Copies of agency reports, audits or evaluations to council.]



   The head of each agency shall promptly transmit to the council copies
of all final reports or studies which the charter or other law requires the
agency or any official thereof to prepare. After July 1, 2019, for every such
report or study that contains data in a list, table, graph, chart or other
non-narrative form, the head of each agency shall also transmit such data to
the council in a non-proprietary format that permits automated processing.
The head of each agency shall also promptly transmit to the council copies of
all final audits, audit reports and evaluations of such agency prepared by
state or federal officials or by private parties. For every report, study,
audit or evaluation that the charter, code or other local law requires an
agency or official to prepare there shall be included in a conspicuous
location a list of the sections of the charter or code, or the local law
number and year if unconsolidated, whose requirements are fulfilled by such
report, study, audit or evaluation, whether in full or in part, provided that
if such section or local law contains requirements to be fulfilled by
different reports then the relevant subdivision or other part of such law
shall be included, and further provided that this requirement shall not apply
if such report, study, audit or evaluation was placed in the charter or code
by a state law and is required to be provided solely to a state agency.



(Am. L.L. 2019/015, 1/11/2019; Am. L.L. 2019/029, 2/9/2019, eff. 6/9/2019)



Section 1135. Restriction on community board membership of employees of
council members and borough presidents.



   No person who is employed by a borough president or a council member
may be appointed to serve on a community board to which such borough
president may make appointments or to which such council member may make
recommendations for appointment.



Section 1136. Certification of officers and employees.



   a.   On or before the tenth day after an individual becomes a public
servant, such individual shall file a written statement with the city clerk
that such individual has read and shall conform to the provisions of this
chapter.



   b.   On or before the tenth day after the head of any mayoral agency
commences the performance of official duties, such agency head shall, in
addition, file a written statement with the city clerk that such agency head
has read and shall conform to the provisions of chapter sixteen.



   c.   The department of citywide administrative services shall make
available such copies of chapters sixteen and forty-nine as are necessary to
fulfill the requirements of this section.



Section 1136.1. Prohibitions on the use of government funds and resources.



   1.   Definitions. As used in this section:



      (a)   "Appear" means to communicate by live and/or recorded,
visual and/or audio images of the candidate, or to use the name of the
candidate, or both, or in a manner which makes the identity of the candidate
otherwise apparent by unambiguous reference.



      (b)   "Candidate" means an individual who seeks nomination for
election, or election, to any elective office to be voted for at a primary,
general or special election whether or not the office has been specifically
identified at such time and whether or not such individual is nominated or
elected; an individual shall be deemed to seek nomination for election, or
election, to an elective office, if he or she has (1) taken the action
necessary to qualify himself or herself for nomination for election, or
election, or (2) received contributions or made expenditures, given his or
her consent for any other person to receive contributions or make
expenditures, with a view to bringing about his or her nomination for
election, or election, to any elective office at any time whether in the year
in which such contributions or expenditures are made or at any other time.



      (c)   "Electioneering message" means a statement designed to
urge the public to elect or defeat a certain candidate for elective office,
or support or oppose a particular political party, or support or oppose a
particular referendum question.



      (d)   "Elective office" means any elective office, including
federal, state, and local offices.



      (e)   "Mass mailing" means identical or nearly identical
pieces of literature or other mass communication totaling more than one
hundred items, including but not limited to newsletters, pamphlets and
informational materials, which are mailed to residents or voters, or any
group or classification thereof, other than in response to specific inquiries
or requests made by members of the public.



      (f)   "Participate" means to authorize, request, suggest,
foster, cooperate, and encompasses actions and omissions of both the
candidate for elective office and any agent acting on behalf of the
candidate, including a political committee authorized by the candidate.



      (g)   "Public servant" means all officials, officers and
employees of the city, including members of community boards and members of
advisory committees, except unpaid members of advisory committees shall not
be public servants.



   2.   (a)   No public servant who is a candidate for nomination or
election to any elective office or the spouse of such public servant shall
appear or otherwise participate in any advertisement or commercial on
television, radio, in print or by electronic means on the Internet, which is
funded, in whole or part, by governmental funds or resources from January
first in the year an election for such elective office shall be held through
the day of the last election that year for that office, in which the
candidate seeks nomination or election.



      (b)   No public servant who is a candidate for nomination or
election to any elective office or the spouse of such public servant shall
use, cause another person to use, or participate in the use of governmental
funds or resources for a mass mailing that is postmarked, if mailed, or
delivered, if by other means, less than ninety days prior to any primary or
general election for any elective office for which office such person is a
candidate for nomination or election; provided, however, that a candidate may
send one mass mailing, which shall be postmarked, if mailed, or delivered, if
by other means, no later than twenty-one days after the adoption of the
executive budget pursuant to section two hundred fifty-four. No such mass
mailing shall be intentionally sent to individuals outside the particular
council district, borough, or other geographic area represented by such
candidate.



      (c)   No public servant shall use governmental funds or
resources for a public communication that contains an electioneering message,
including but not limited to information placed by electronic means on the
Internet.



      (d)   In the case of a candidate in a special election to fill
a vacancy in an elective office, the prohibitions set forth in paragraphs (a)
and (b) of this subdivision shall apply from the day the special election is
declared through the day of the special election.



   3.   (a)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit appearances or
participation by public servants in or the use of governmental funds or
resources for:



         (i)   advertisements and other communications required
by law;



         (ii)   communications necessary to safeguard public
health and safety;



         (iii)   standard communications in response to inquiries
or requests;



         (iv)   ordinary communications between public servants
and members of the public;



         (v)   ordinary communications between elected officials
and their constituents;



         (vi)   bona fide news coverage in print and electronic
media; or



         (vii)   debates among opposing candidates or other
public education forums.



      (b)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit
the public funding of candidates pursuant to any voluntary system of campaign
finance reform established by local law or the lawful use of such public
funds by such candidates.



      (c)   Nothing in this section shall be deemed to permit any
interest or conduct prohibited by chapter sixty-eight of this charter or by
any rule, regulation, opinion, or determination of the conflicts of interest
board issued pursuant thereto or to restrict in any way the powers and
obligations of the conflicts of interest board.



   4.   The intentional or knowing violation of this section shall be
punishable as a misdemeanor in addition to any other penalty as may be
provided under law. Additionally, the campaign finance board shall have the
power to investigate and determine whether any use of governmental funds or
resources pursuant to paragraph (b) of subdivision two of this section is a
violation of such paragraph and, if such violation is found, whether such use
of government resources also violates or constitutes a contribution and/or
expenditure under chapter seven of title three of the administrative code of
the city of New York or any rule promulgated thereunder. The campaign finance
board may assess civil penalties, upon giving written notice and the
opportunity to appear before the board, against candidates for offices
covered by the system of campaign finance reform, in an amount not in excess
of ten thousand dollars for each such violation.



Chapter 50: Term Limits



Section 1137. Public policy.



   It is hereby declared to be the public policy of the city of New York
to limit the time elected officials can serve as mayor, public advocate,
comptroller, borough president and council member so that there is more
opportunity for citizen participation in the legislative and executive
branches and the airing of a greater diversity of ideas. It is further
declared that this policy is most appropriately served by limiting the time
such officials can serve to not more than two consecutive full terms. It is
further declared that public confidence in government should be protected by
restricting amendments that would affect the application of term limits to
any elected official then in office.



Section 1138. Term limits.



   a.   Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary contained in this
charter, no person shall be eligible to be elected to or serve in the office
of mayor, public advocate, comptroller, borough president or council member
if that person had previously held such office for two or more consecutive
full terms, unless one full term or more has elapsed since that person last
held such office.



   b.   Notwithstanding any other provision to the contrary, no local
law may be enacted by the city council, including but not limited to
amendment of the provisions of this chapter, if such local law would alter or
permit alteration of the term limit set forth in this section as such limit
applies to any person then serving in the office of mayor, public advocate,
comptroller, borough president or council member.



   c.   Severability. If any provision of this section, or any
provision of paragraph one of subdivision k of section eleven hundred
fifty-two relating to the application of this section, shall be held invalid
or ineffective in whole or in part or inapplicable to any person or
situation, such holding shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder
of this section and such paragraph, and all other provisions thereof shall
nevertheless be separately and fully effective and the application of any
such provision to other persons or situations shall not be affected.



Chapter 51: Transitory Provisions



Section 1140. Relation of this charter to existing law.



   It is the purpose and intent of this charter to set forth the structure
of the city government and the manner in which it is to operate, in
accordance with the provisions of chapter six hundred thirty-four of the laws
of nineteen hundred seventy-two, as amended, and to continue in force all
provisions of the New York City Charter adopted on November seventh, nineteen
hundred sixty-one, as amended, and all other provisions of law affecting the
city and the counties within the city, not inconsistent with the provisions
of this charter, in force at the time when this charter shall take effect,
until repealed or amended or until continued in the revision, simplification,
consolidation, codification, restatement and annotation of the administrative
code of the City of New York.



Section 1141. Rights of officers and employees preserved.



   Nothing in this charter contained shall affect or impair the rights or
privileges of officers or employees of the city or of any agency existing at
the time when this charter shall take effect, or any provision of law in
force at the time when this charter shall take effect and not inconsistent
with the provisions of this charter, in relation to the personnel,
appointment, ranks, grades, tenure of office, promotion, removal, pension and
retirement rights, civil rights or any other rights or privileges of officers
or employees of the city generally or officers or employees of any agency.



Section 1142. Continuity of powers and duties.



   Any agency or officer to whom are assigned by this charter any powers
and duties shall exercise such powers and duties in continuation of their
exercise by the agency or officer by which the same were heretofore exercised
and shall have power to continue any business, proceeding or other matter
commenced by the agency or officer by which such powers and duties were
heretofore exercised. Any provision in any law, rule, regulation, contract,
grant or other document relating to the subject-matter of such powers or
duties and applicable to the agency or officer formerly exercising such
powers and duties shall, so far as not inconsistent with the provisions of
this charter, apply to the agency or officer to which such powers and duties
are assigned by this charter.



Section 1143. Transfer of officers and employees in case of transfer of
functions.



   Wherever by any provision of this charter functions, powers or duties
are assigned to any agency or officer which have been heretofore exercised by
any other agency or officer, all officers and employees in the classified
municipal civil service who at the time when such charter provisions shall
take effect are engaged in the performance of such functions, powers or
duties shall be transferred to the agency to which such functions, powers or
duties are assigned by this charter, without examination and without
affecting existing compensation or pension or retirement rights, privileges
or obligations of such officers and employees.



Section 1144. Transfer of records and property.



   All records, property and equipment whatsoever of any agency or part
thereof, all the powers and duties of which are assigned to any other agency
by this charter, shall be transferred and delivered to the agency to which
such powers and duties as so assigned. If part of the powers and duties of
any agency or part thereof are by this charter assigned to another agency,
all records, property and equipment relating thereto shall be transferred and
delivered to the agency to which such powers and duties are so assigned.



Section 1145. Continuity of agencies.



   a.   Any agency provided for in this charter with a name the same or
substantially the same as that of an agency heretofore existing shall be
deemed to be a continuation of such agency heretofore existing and shall
exercise its powers and duties in continuation of their exercise by the
agency by which the same were heretofore exercised and shall have power to
continue any business, proceeding or other matter commenced by the agency by
which such powers and duties were heretofore exercised. Any provision in any
law, rule, regulation, contract, grant or other document relating to such
formerly existing agency shall, so far as not inconsistent with the
provisions of this charter, apply to such agency provided for by this charter.



   b.   The commissioner of finance shall have and exercise all the
functions, powers and duties exercised by the treasurer and all the
functions, powers and duties exercised by the comptroller in respect of
excise and non-property taxes prior to the first day of January, nineteen
hundred sixty-three.



   c.   The commissioner of finance shall have and exercise all the
functions, powers and duties exercised by the tax department prior to the
first day of January, nineteen hundred sixty-three other than the function,
power and duty to hear and determine applications for the correction of
assessments on real property and for the exemption of such property from
taxation.



Section 1146. Pending actions and proceedings.



   No action or proceeding, civil or criminal, pending at the time when
this charter shall take effect, brought by or against the city or any agency
or officer, shall be affected or abated by the adoption of this charter or by
anything therein contained; but all such actions or proceedings may be
continued notwithstanding that functions, powers and duties of any agency or
officer party thereto may by this charter be assigned or transferred to
another agency or officer, but in that event the same may be prosecuted or
defended by the head of the agency to which such functions, powers and duties
have been assigned or transferred by this charter.



Section 1147. Existing rights and remedies preserved.



   No existing right or remedy of any character shall be lost or impaired
or affected by reason of the adoption of this charter.



Chapter 52: General Provisions



Section 1150. Definitions.



   For the purposes of this charter:



      1.   The term "city" shall mean the city of New York, and
unless the context otherwise requires, shall include the several boroughs.



      2.   The term "agency" shall mean a city, county, borough, or
other office, position, administration, department, division, bureau, board
or commission, or a corporation, institution or agency of government, the
expenses of which are paid in whole or in part from the city treasury.



      3.   The term "law" or "laws" shall include the constitution,
this charter, any statute, the administrative code, any local law, and any
ordinance, rule or regulation having the force of law.



      4.   The term "statute" shall mean an act of the legislature.



      5.   The term "maintenance" shall include minor repairs, and
in case of doubt the mayor or an officer designated by him shall decide
whether a repair is a minor repair.



      6.   The term "intercepting sewer" shall mean a sewer the
principal purpose of which is the interception from other sewers and
conveyance of sewage to treatment plants. In case of doubt the council shall
decide whether a sewer is an intercepting sewer.



      7.   a.   The term "wharf property" shall mean wharves,
piers, docks and bulkheads and structures thereon and slips and basins, the
land beneath any of the foregoing, and all rights, privileges and easements
appurtenant thereto and land under water in the port of New York, and such
upland or made land adjacent thereto as was vested in the department of docks
on January first, nineteen hundred thirty-eight or thereafter was or may be
assigned to it or its successor agencies.



         b.   "Water front property" shall mean all property
fronting on all the tidal waters in the port and city of New York and
extending inshore to the property line of the first adverse owner and shall
include such land under water extending outshore to the pierhead line or the
property line, whichever extends furthest outshore.



         c.   "Water front commerce" shall mean the activity on
water front property which encompasses the receipt of cargo or goods at the
wharves, piers, docks or bulkheads from ships and their delivery to points
inland or the receipt of such cargo or goods at such wharves, piers, docks or
bulkheads from points inland for shipment by ships and shall include the
temporary storage of such cargo or goods in the sheds or warehouses on such
property pending their delivery or shipment.



         d.   "Furtherance of navigation" shall mean the activity
on water front property which involves ship building, ship repairing,
boating, dry dock facilities and similar uses.



      8.   The term "the port of New York" shall include all the
waters of the North river, the East river and the Harlem river and all the
tidal waters embraced within or adjacent to or opposite to the shores of the
city.



      9.   The terms "three-fourths vote" and "two-thirds vote" when
they apply to the council shall mean respectively three-fourths and
two-thirds of all the members of the council are entitled to cast.



      10.   The term "administrative code" shall mean the
administrative code of the city.



      11.   The term "budget" shall mean the expense budget unless
the context otherwise requires.



      12.   Except as in this charter otherwise provided, the term
"real property" shall include real estate, lands, tenements and
hereditaments, corporeal or incorporeal.



      13.   The term "domestic partner" shall mean persons who have
a registered domestic partnership pursuant to section 3-240 of the
administrative code, a domestic partnership registered in accordance with
executive order number 123, dated August 7, 1989, or a domestic partnership
registered in accordance with executive order number 48, dated January 7,
1993.



Section 1151. Effect of this charter on existing law.



   a.   All laws and parts of laws relating to or affecting the city of
New York or the municipalities consolidated therein in force when this
charter as amended shall take effect are hereby repealed and superseded to
the extent that the same are inconsistent with the provisions of this charter
and no further.



   b.   All other laws and parts of laws shall continue in force until
repealed, amended, modified or superseded.



   c.   Insofar as the provisions of this charter are the same in terms
or in substance and effect as provisions of law in force when this charter
shall take effect, relating to or affecting the city of New York, the
provisions of this charter are intended to be not a new enactment but a
continuation of such provisions of law, and this charter shall be so
construed and applied.



Section 1152. Time of taking effect.



   a.   This charter shall take effect on the first day of January,
nineteen hundred sixty-three and thereafter shall control in respect to all
the powers, functions and duties of all officers, agencies, and employees of
the city as provided herein, except that chapter twelve hereof shall take
effect on January first, nineteen hundred sixty-two.



   b.   The amendments to the charter approved by the electors on
November fourth, nineteen hundred seventy-five shall take effect on January
first, nineteen hundred seventy-seven, and thereafter shall control as
provided in respect to all the powers, functions and duties of all offices,
agencies, and employees except as further specifically provided in other
sections of this revised charter and except:



      (1)   that existing community districts and community boards
shall continue in force and effect until the new community districts and
community boards pursuant to chapters sixty-nine and seventy are established
pursuant to this revised charter;



      (2)   that powers and duties of community boards and borough
boards pursuant to chapters six, eight, nine, fourteen, fifteen,
twenty-seven, sixty-nine and seventy shall be assumed by the existing
community boards and borough boards on July first, nineteen hundred
seventy-six and such boards shall continue to have such powers and duties
until new community boards and borough boards are established within the new
community districts and the boroughs pursuant to chapters sixty-nine and
seventy, which boards shall assume the powers and duties specified in this
charter at such time; and



      (3)   that the other amended provisions of this charter
requiring any act to be done prior to January first, nineteen hundred
seventy-seven shall take effect immediately upon adoption.



   c.   The amendments to the charter approved by the electors on
November eighth, nineteen hundred eighty-eight shall take effect immediately,
and thereafter shall control as provided in respect to all the powers,
functions and duties of all offices, agencies, and employees except as
further specifically provided in other sections of this revised charter and
except:



      (1)   that, with respect to the tax appeals tribunal
established in section one hundred sixty-eight,



         (a)   the mayor shall appoint the first three
commissioners, and shall designate one of them as president, no later than
the first day of July, nineteen hundred eighty-nine;



         (b)   the tribunal shall adopt rules of procedure
pursuant to section one hundred sixty-nine no later than the first day of
December, nineteen hundred eighty-nine; and



         (c)   the tribunal shall begin accepting, hearing and
determining appeals on the first day of January, nineteen hundred ninety;



      (2)   that the effective date of section one thousand
forty-six shall be the first day of July nineteen hundred ninety, and



      (3)   that the provisions of the new chapter sixty-eight,
entitled conflicts of interest, shall take effect on the first day of
January, nineteen hundred ninety, and the provisions of chapter sixty-eight
heretofore in effect, entitled ethics, shall remain in effect up to and
including the thirty-first day of December of nineteen hundred and
eighty-nine, at which time they shall be repealed, provided, however, that:



         (a)   section twenty-six hundred eight of chapter
sixty-eight heretofore in effect shall not be repealed but shall be
renumbered as section one hundred thirty-one and shall continue in effect;



         (b)   section twenty-six hundred two shall take effect
immediately and subdivisions a, b, c, d, i, j and k of section twenty-six
hundred three of the new chapter sixty-eight shall become effective upon
confirmation of the members nominated by the mayor pursuant to subdivision c
of such section twenty-six hundred two;



         (c)   section twenty-six hundred of chapter sixty-eight
heretofore in effect, shall only remain in effect until the confirmation of
the members nominated by the mayor pursuant to subdivision c of section
twenty-six hundred two of the new chapter sixty-eight;



         (d)   the powers vested in the board of ethics by
chapter sixty-eight heretofore in effect shall, upon the expiration of
section twenty-six hundred of such chapter, be transferred, assigned and
devolved upon the conflicts of interest board established by section
twenty-six hundred two of the new chapter sixty-eight of the charter;



         (e)   the provisions of sections twenty-six hundred
four, twenty-six hundred five, twenty-six hundred six, and twenty-six hundred
seven of chapter sixty-eight heretofore in effect shall govern the conduct of
officers or employees of the city or of any city agency and former officers
or employees of the city or of any city agency engaged in prior to the
effective date of section twenty-six hundred four of the new chapter
sixty-eight;



         (f)   the provisions of subdivision h of section
twenty-six hundred four of chapter sixty-eight heretofore in effect shall
govern the conduct of former officers or employees of the city or of any city
agency who leave city employ prior to the effective date of subdivision d of
section twenty-six hundred four of the new chapter sixty-eight, engaged in on
or after such date, and shall be enforceable pursuant to subdivisions j, k
and l of such section.



         (g)   for any officer or employee of the city who is in
city employ as of the thirty-first day of December, nineteen hundred
eighty-nine, the provisions of subdivisions g, h and i of section twenty-six
hundred four of chapter sixty-eight heretofore in effect shall remain in
effect up to and including the thirty-first day of March, nineteen hundred
ninety and shall be enforceable pursuant to subdivisions j, k and l of such
section, and the provisions of paragraphs one, two, four, six and seven of
subdivision d of section twenty-six hundred four of the new chapter
sixty-eight shall become effective on the first day of April, nineteen
hundred ninety, provided, however, that this subparagraph shall not apply to
elected officials, members of the city planning commission, including the
chair, and employees of the department of city planning.



         (h)   for members of the city planning commission,
including the chair, and employees of the department of city planning, the
provisions of subdivisions g, h and i of section twenty-six hundred four of
chapter sixty-eight heretofore in effect shall remain in effect up to and
including the thirtieth day of June, nineteen hundred ninety and shall be
enforceable pursuant to subdivisions j, k and l of such section, and the
provisions of paragraphs one, two, three, four, six, and seven of subdivision
d of section twenty-six hundred four of the new chapter sixty-eight shall
become effective on the first day of July, nineteen hundred ninety.



   d.   The amendments to the charter approved by the electors on
November seventh, nineteen hundred eighty-nine shall take effect on the first
day of January, nineteen hundred ninety, and thereafter shall control as
provided in respect to all the powers, functions and duties of all officers,
agencies and employees, except as further specifically provided in other
sections of this charter and except:



      (1)   that, except for the new section three hundred eleven
which shall take effect on the first day of January, nineteen hundred ninety,
the amendments of chapter thirteen shall take effect on the first day of
September, nineteen hundred ninety, provided, however, that:



         (a)   the appointments required to be made by the mayor
and the comptroller to the procurement policy board pursuant to section three
hundred eleven shall be made by the fifteenth day of January, nineteen
hundred ninety;



         (b)   the procurement policy board, upon its creation,
shall be authorized to exercise the authority granted to it by the remaining
sections of chapter thirteen otherwise not to take effect until the first day
of September, nineteen hundred ninety, to promulgate rules prior to the
effective date of those sections as are necessary to implement the provisions
of the chapter. Such rules required by the chapter to be promulgated shall be
proposed in accordance with the requirements of subdivision b of section one
thousand forty-three of this charter by the first day of June, nineteen
hundred ninety; and



         (c)   contract solicitations initiated prior to the
first day of September, nineteen hundred ninety which would otherwise require
the approval of the board of estimate that are not submitted to the board of
estimate for approval by such date shall be awarded by the agency in
accordance with the provisions of chapter thirteen otherwise not to take
effect until the first day of September, nineteen hundred ninety and, to the
extent practicable, with the rules of the procurement policy board; and



         (d)   all other contract solicitations for which the
contract will be executed on or after the first day of September, nineteen
hundred ninety shall be awarded in accordance with the provisions of chapter
thirteen otherwise not to take effect until the first day of September,
nineteen hundred ninety, and, to the extent practicable, with the rules of
the procurement policy board;



         (e)   notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein,
the proceedings of any contractor board of responsibility pending as of the
thirty-first day of August, nineteen hundred ninety may be continued after
such date until final determination.



      (2)   that chapter eleven of the charter shall take effect on
the first day of January, nineteen hundred ninety-six and the provisions of
subdivision b of section two hundred fifty-nine of such chapter shall apply
with respect to the fiscal year beginning on the first day of July, nineteen
hundred ninety-six and that, pursuant to the requirements of such chapter,
the comptroller and the public advocate shall appoint the independent budget
office advisory committee no later than the fifteenth day of February of
nineteen hundred ninety-six; such advisory committee shall make its
recommendations, to the special committee convened to appoint the director of
the independent budget office, no later than the fifteenth day of June of
nineteen hundred ninety-six; and such special committee shall make its
appointment of a director no later than the first day of August nineteen
hundred ninety-six;



      (3)   that, effective immediately, no appointment to the civil
service commission shall be made except upon the recommendation of the
screening committee required by section eight hundred twelve of the charter;



      (4)   that, the provisions of subdivision b of section one
hundred and four of the charter shall not apply to the contract budget
submitted by the mayor for the fiscal year beginning the first day of July,
nineteen hundred ninety nor to the contract budget adopted by the council for
such year;



      (5)   that, the amendments to sections one hundred ninety-two,
one hundred ninety-six, one hundred ninety-eight and to chapters twenty-seven
and seventy-one, and the provisions of section two hundred three shall take
effect immediately upon certification that the electors have approved the
amendments to the charter, provided, however, that the amendments to
subdivision a of section one hundred ninety-two (other than the portions
thereof requiring appointments of the members of the city planning commission
on or before the first day of March, nineteen hundred ninety and providing
for the length of the terms of the first appointees to the commission) shall
take effect on the first day of July, nineteen hundred ninety;



      (6)   that, the amendments to sections one hundred ninety-one,
one hundred ninety-three, one hundred ninety-seven-a, one hundred
ninety-seven-b, one hundred ninety-seven-c, one hundred ninety-nine, two
hundred, two hundred one and two hundred two; the provisions of sections one
hundred ninety-five, one hundred ninety-seven-d and two hundred four (except
for subdivisions (g) and (h) thereof); the amendments to chapters fourteen,
fifteen, twenty-one, twenty-nine, fifty-nine and sixty-one; and the
provisions of chapters forty-eight and seventy-four shall take effect on the
first day of July, nineteen hundred ninety, provided, however, that:



         (a)   notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein,
the board of estimate shall continue to review and approve applications
pursuant to sections one hundred ninety-seven-c and two hundred as heretofore
in effect that have been acted upon by the city planning commission on or
before the thirtieth day of June, nineteen hundred ninety;



         (b)   notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein,
subdivisions b, d, e, f and g of section one hundred ninety-seven-c shall
take effect on the second day of May, nineteen hundred ninety; and the period
for review of applications by the borough presidents provided for in such
subdivision g shall extend until the thirtieth day of June, nineteen hundred
ninety in the case of all applications referred to the borough presidents in
the month of May, nineteen hundred ninety;



         (c)   notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein,
any application pursuant to sections one hundred ninety-seven-c or two
hundred heretofore in effect that requires borough board review and is acted
on by the affected borough board after the second day of May, nineteen
hundred ninety shall be forwarded to the affected borough president for
review pursuant to subdivision g of section one hundred ninety-seven-c in
accordance with paragraph (b) of this subdivision; and



         (d)   notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein,
the board of estimate shall continue up to and including the thirty-first day
of August, nineteen hundred ninety, to review designations by the landmarks
preservation commission, pursuant to section 25-303 of the administrative
code, which have been approved by the landmarks preservation commission on or
before the first day of May, nineteen hundred ninety; and designations by the
landmarks preservation commission made after the first day of May and on or
before the thirtieth day of June, nineteen hundred ninety, shall be subject
to subdivisions eight and nine of section three thousand twenty, provided
that the period for any reviews by the city planning commission and the
council under such subdivisions eight and nine shall commence on the first
day of July, nineteen hundred ninety;



      (7)   that, subdivisions g and h of section two hundred four
shall take effect on the first day of July, nineteen hundred ninety-one;



      (8)   that, an elected city official who, as of the first day
of January nineteen hundred ninety, holds both an elected city office and a
party office, shall not be subject to the requirements of paragraph fifteen
of subdivision b of section twenty-six hundred four in regard to such offices
until the earlier of (i) the expiration of the term of the city office to
which such official was elected prior to such date or (ii) the expiration of
the term of the party office to which such official was elected or appointed
prior to such date;



      (9)   that, notwithstanding the provisions of section
twenty-five, the council members elected at the general election in the year
nineteen hundred eighty-nine shall serve for a term of two years and an
additional election of council members shall be held at the general election
in the year nineteen hundred ninety-one. The council members elected at such
election shall serve for a term of two years.



      (10)   that, notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph two
of subdivision b, and subdivision c, of section fifty, a districting
commission shall be appointed to prepare a districting plan for the nineteen
hundred ninety-one additional election of council members in accordance with
all of the requirements of chapter two-A except that such appointments shall
be made in accordance with the following schedule:



         (a)   between the tenth and twentieth days of January
nineteen hundred ninety, the mayor shall convene the meeting or meetings
required by paragraph two of subdivision b of section fifty;



         (b)   on or before the fifteenth day of March of
nineteen hundred ninety, each council delegation authorized to make
appointments to the districting commission shall make such appointments, and
each chairperson of a county committee of a political party authorized to
submit nominations to the mayor shall submit such nominations; and



         (c)   following the actions required by subparagraph (b)
of this paragraph but no later than the fifteenth day of April of nineteen
hundred ninety, the mayor shall make the remaining appointments to the
districting commission.



         (d)   The commission's term shall end sixty days after
the day of the general election of the council in the year nineteen hundred
ninety-one.



      (11)   that, notwithstanding the provisions of chapter two-A,
the districting commission appointed pursuant to paragraph ten of ten of this
subdivision shall prepare a districting plan for the nineteen hundred
ninety-one additional election of council members in accordance with the
provisions of this paragraph and in accordance with the provisions of chapter
two-A, to the extent that the provisions of such chapter are not inconsistent
with the provisions of this paragraph.



         (a)   Following its appointment, the districting
commission appointed pursuant to paragraph ten of this subdivision shall meet
at least once each month during nineteen hundred ninety and at least once
every two weeks during nineteen hundred ninety-one until such time as it has
completed its duties pursuant to this paragraph and chapter two-A.



         (b)   In carrying out its responsibilities under this
paragraph and chapter two-A, the commission shall utilize the final count
results of the nineteen hundred ninety census delivered to the governor no
later than the first day of April, nineteen hundred ninety-one in accordance
with the provisions of section one hundred forty-one of title thirteen of the
United States code.



         (c)   As soon as practicable, the commission shall (i)
establish liaison with the United States census bureau and relevant New York
state agencies to facilitate the orderly and timely receipt of the results of
the nineteen hundred ninety census in a format that will facilitate the
commission's completion of its responsibilities and (ii) obtain such
equipment, software, services and personnel as are necessary for it to
effectively carry out its responsibilities under this paragraph and chapter
two-A.



         (d)   On or before the fifteenth day of May, nineteen
hundred ninety, the director of city planning shall present to the commission
an analysis of the demographic changes that have occurred in the city of New
York since the nineteen hundred eighty census, a summary of the various
estimates that have been made of the nineteen hundred ninety population of
the city and various subdivisions of the city, an analysis of the
implications of such forecasts for the establishment of districts for the
nineteen hundred ninety-one council elections, and estimates of the nineteen
hundred ninety population and population characteristics of existing council,
assembly, community and congressional districts, to the extent such
information is available. The director of city planning shall periodically
thereafter provide the commission with any revisions of such information and
any such additional information that will be of assistance to the commission
in carrying out its responsibilities under chapter two-A. The director of
city planning shall, to the maximum extent practicable, provide the
commission with such technical assistance as it may require to carry out its
responsibilities.



         (e)   On or before the fifteenth day of June of nineteen
hundred ninety, the director of city planning and the corporation counsel
shall provide the commission with all information, available to them,
regarding the status of the nineteen hundred ninety census and the schedule
for the release of the results of such census, as will assist the commission
in developing the work plan and schedule required by this paragraph.



         (f)   On or before the fifteenth day of June, nineteen
hundred ninety, the director of city planning and the commissioner of
computer and data communications services shall provide the commission with
as complete a listing as possible of the computer software products available
for the utilization of census data in the establishment of districts and the
analysis of the demographic characteristics of such districts; a comparative
evaluation of the strengths, weaknesses, costs and benefits of the various
products available including information as to the quantity and type of staff
necessary to utilize the various products; an identification and description
of the relevant professional services available from public and private
entities; including information regarding the rates at which such services
are likely to be available; and a description of the assistance which the
department of city planning and the computer and data communications services
agency can provide to the commission.



         (g)   On or before the fifteenth day of September,
nineteen hundred ninety, the commission shall adopt a work plan and time
schedule for the establishment of council districts for the nineteen hundred
ninety-one elections in accordance with the provisions of this paragraph and
chapter two-A.



         (h)   Between the first day of October and the tenth day
of December, nineteen hundred ninety, the commission shall hold at least one
public hearing in each borough to obtain (i) information regarding
demographic trends and conditions and suggestions regarding the factors that
interested parties believe the commission should consider and the procedures
that it should utilize in the establishment of council districts for the
nineteen hundred ninety-one elections.



         (i)   On or before the first day of February, nineteen
hundred ninety-one, the commission shall produce, and make available for
public inspection, prototype fifty-one district plans for the purpose of
testing and demonstrating the analytical and technical capabilities necessary
to meet the deadlines set forth in subparagraph j of this paragraph.



         (j)   Notwithstanding the provisions of section
fifty-one, the commission shall complete the following steps in accordance
with the following schedule:



            (i)   on or before the first day of May, nineteen
hundred ninety-one, the commission shall make its plan available to the
public and the council for review and comment; and on or before the tenth day
of such month the commission shall hold one or more public hearings on such
plan;



            (ii)   on or before the twentieth day of May,
nineteen hundred ninety-one, the commission, after consideration of all
comments received from the public and the council by the fourteenth day of
May of such year, shall make a revised plan and supporting data available for
public inspection and shall give public notice that comments on such revised
plan may be submitted through the twenty-seventh day of May, nineteen hundred
ninety-one; and on or before such latter date, the commission shall hold one
or more public hearings on such plan; and



            (iii)   on or before the seventh day of June,
nineteen hundred ninety-one, the commission shall adopt its final plan in
accordance with subdivision g of section fifty-one.



         (k)   After the commission files its final plan with the
city clerk pursuant to clause (iii) of subparagraph (j) of paragraph (10) of
subdivision (d) of this section, the commission shall make such adjustments
in its plan as may be required by court order or upon a determination of the
United States Department of Justice.



      (12)   that the amendments to chapter forty-six shall take
effect immediately;



      (13)   that the provisions of subdivision a of section twenty
eight hundred shall take effect immediately and:



         (a)   that for the purpose of appointing members of
community boards for terms commencing on the first day of April, nineteen
hundred ninety and on the first day of April, nineteen hundred ninety-one
pursuant to such subdivision, the city planning commission shall, by the
first day of January, nineteen hundred ninety, determine the proportion of
the community district's population represented by each council member on the
basis of data available as of such date and file the determination with the
appropriate borough president, community board and council member; and



         (b)   that the terms of community board members which
would expire on the thirty-first day of December, nineteen hundred eighty
nine, pursuant to the charter heretofore in effect, shall expire on the
thirty-first day of March, nineteen hundred ninety and that the terms of
community board members which would expire on the thirty-first day of
December, nineteen hundred ninety, pursuant to the charter heretofore in
effect, shall expire on the thirty-first day of March, nineteen hundred
ninety-one.



      (14)   that the repeal of sections sixty-one through sixty-six
of chapter three, the amendment of subdivision nine of section eleven hundred
fifty and the amendments to subdivisions one and sixteen of section
thirty-eight, as renumbered by these amendments, deleting references to the
Board of Estimate shall take effect on the first day of September of nineteen
hundred ninety.



      (15)   that, subdivisions a, b, and c and the first sentence
of subdivision d of section one hundred ninety-five shall take effect upon
the first to occur of (a) November 1, 1990 or (b) the effective date of the
criteria for the location of city facilities promulgated pursuant to section
two hundred three. Any agency proposing an acquisition pursuant to section
one hundred ninety-five prior thereto shall, upon receiving approval of such
acquisition from the commissioner of general services, file a notice of
intent to acquire with the Council, which may consider and act upon the
acquisition pursuant to the last sentence of subdivision d of such section.



      (16)   that the provisions of paragraph a of subdivision three
of section sixteen hundred two requiring the commissioner of general services
to consider the criteria for location of city facilities prior to submitting
an application pursuant to section one hundred ninety-seven-c for an
acquisition or disposition of property shall take effect upon the effective
date of such criteria pursuant to section two hundred three.



   e.   On and after the first day of September of nineteen hundred
ninety the powers and responsibilities of the board of estimate, set forth in
any state or local law, that are not otherwise devolved by the terms of such
law, upon another body, agency or officer shall devolve upon the body, agency
or officer of the city charged with comparable and related powers and
responsibilities under this charter, consistent with the purposes and intent
of this charter, provided specifically that the council shall succeed to the
powers and responsibilities exercised by the board of estimate pursuant to
article sixteen of the general municipal law.



   f.   Officers and employees of the city may take any actions as are
necessary and appropriate to prepare for the implementation of the provisions
of amendments to the charter approved by the electors on November seventh,
nineteen hundred eighty-nine prior to such effective dates as are prescribed
by subdivision d of this section.



   g.   The amendments to the charter approved by the electors on
November third, nineteen hundred ninety-eight shall take effect on the first
day of January, nineteen hundred ninety-nine, and thereafter shall control as
provided in respect to all the powers, functions and duties of all officers,
agencies and employees, except as further specifically provided in other
sections of this charter.



   h.   (1)   (a)   The amendments to the charter, amending
section six hundred three and adding a new chapter twenty-four-B, approved by
the electors on November sixth, two thousand-one, shall take effect
immediately, or as soon thereafter as a transfer of agency functions may be
effectuated, and thereafter shall control as provided in respect to all the
powers, functions and duties of all officers, agencies and employees, except
as further specifically provided in other sections of this charter.



         (b)   Officers and employees of the city shall take any
actions as are necessary and appropriate to prepare for the implementation of
the provisions of the amendments to the charter, approved by the electors on
November sixth, two thousand-one, prior to the effective dates prescribed in
subparagraph a of this section.*



      (2)   The amendments to the charter, adding new chapters
eighteen-C and eighteen-D, and a new section five hundred twenty-six-a,
approved by the electors on November sixth, two thousand-one, shall take
effect immediately upon certification that the electors have approved the
amendments to the charter, and thereafter shall control as provided in
respect to all the powers, functions and duties of all officers, agencies and
employees, except as further specifically provided in other sections of this
charter.



      (3)   The amendments to the charter, adding a new subdivision
g to section eight, a new section eighteen, and a new chapter forty, approved
by the electors on November sixth, two thousand-one, shall take effect
immediately, and thereafter shall control as provided in respect to all the
powers, functions and duties of all officers, agencies and employees, except
as further specifically provided in other sections of this charter.



      (4)   (a)   The amendments to the charter, amending section
fifteen and chapter twenty-two, repealing chapter twenty-three, renumbering
section one thousand fifty-eight, amending renumbered section one thousand
fifty-seven-a and sections fourteen hundred three, fourteen hundred four, and
twenty-nine hundred three, approved by the electors on November sixth, two
thousand-one, shall take effect immediately, or as soon thereafter as a
transfer of agency functions may be effectuated, and thereafter shall control
as provided in respect to all the powers, functions and duties of all
officers, agencies and employees, except as further specifically provided in
other sections of this charter, except that the amendments to the charter,
amending section five hundred fifty-three of such chapter twenty-two, shall
take effect June 1, 2002 or the date upon which the ten members of the
reconstituted and expanded board other than the chairperson have been duly
appointed and qualified, whichever is earlier, provided, however, that of the
first nine members of the board of health appointed on or after the effective
date of these amendments, three members shall serve for two years, three
members shall serve for four years, and the remainder shall serve for six
years, provided further, however, that the term of any member of the board of
health serving on the date of the approval of these amendments shall be
deemed expired on such effective date.



         (b)   Officers and employees of the city shall take any
actions as are necessary and appropriate to prepare for the implementation of
the provisions of the amendments to the charter, approved by the electors on
November sixth, two thousand-one, prior to the effective dates prescribed in
subparagraph a of this section.*



      (5)   (a)   The amendments to the charter, adding new
chapters nineteen-A and sixty-three, and new sections nineteen, three hundred
thirty-five, and three hundred ninety-eight, approved by the electors on
November sixth, two thousand-one, shall take effect immediately, or as soon
thereafter as a transfer of agency functions may be effectuated, and
thereafter shall control as provided in respect to all the powers, functions
and duties of all officers, agencies and employees, except as further
specifically provided in other sections of this charter.



         (b)   Officers and employees of the city shall take any
actions as are necessary and appropriate to prepare for the implementation of
the provisions of the amendments to the charter, approved by the electors on
November sixth, two thousand-one, prior to the effective dates prescribed in
subparagraph a of this section.*



   i.   (1)   The amendments to the charter, amending sections ten,
twenty-four, and forty-four, approved by the electors on November fifth, two
thousand two, shall take effect immediately, provided that any vacancy that
occurs in the office of the mayor on or after September twentieth, two
thousand two, and before the effective date of the amendments referenced in
this subdivision, shall be governed by such amendments, and any such vacancy
shall be deemed to have occurred on such effective date.



      (2)   Notwithstanding the provisions of section 1153, in the
event that the amendment set forth in paragraph 10 of the new subdivision c
of section 10 is finally adjudicated to be invalid or otherwise cannot be
implemented, all of the amendments referenced in this subdivision shall be
without any further force and effect and, at such time, sections ten,
twenty-four, and forty-four as they existed immediately prior to the
effective date of such amendments shall be reinstated and shall be deemed to
have always remained in full force and effect and unamended by such
amendments.



   j.   (1)   The amendments to the charter, adding a new section
thirteen-a and amending subdivision two of section one thousand forty-nine,
approved by the electors on November eighth, two thousand five, shall take
effect immediately, and thereafter shall control as provided with respect to
all the powers, functions and duties of officers, agencies and employees,
except as further specifically provided in other sections of this charter.



      (2)   The amendments to the charter, repealing and reenacting
section two hundred fifty-eight and amending sections ninety-five, one
hundred one, two hundred thirteen, two hundred thirty-three and two hundred
sixty-six and subdivision six of section two hundred fifty, approved by the
electors on November eighth, two thousand five, shall take effect
immediately, and thereafter shall control as provided with respect to all the
powers, functions and duties of officers, agencies and employees, except as
further specifically provided in other sections of this charter.



   (k)   (1)   The amendments to the charter, amending sections
eleven hundred thirty-seven and eleven hundred thirty-eight, approved by the
electors on November second, two thousand ten, shall take effect immediately,
and hereafter shall control as provided with respect to all the powers,
functions and duties of officers, agencies and employees; provided, however,
that, notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of the charter, persons
holding the offices of mayor, public advocate, comptroller, borough president
or council member on the date such amendments take effect shall be subject,
with respect to eligibility to be elected to or serve in the offices so held,
to the provisions of section eleven hundred thirty-eight that were in effect
immediately prior to the approval of such amendments, and to the provisions
of subdivision b of such section as added by such amendments until one full
term or more has elapsed since having last held such offices, after which
such persons shall be fully subject to the provisions of section eleven
hundred thirty-eight, as amended by such amendments, in its entirety.



      (2)   (a)   (i)   The amendments to the charter,
amending subdivision d of section two hundred four, subdivision e of section
one thousand forty-six, section one thousand forty-eight, subdivision one of
section one thousand forty-nine, subdivision a of section one thousand
forty-nine-a, paragraph one of subdivision a of section one thousand
fifty-two, paragraph two of subdivision b of section twenty-six hundred
three, and subdivision b of section twenty-six hundred six, and adding a new
paragraph fifteen of subdivision a of section one thousand fifty-two, a new
section one thousand fifty-seven-b, a new subdivision (g) of section
twenty-two hundred three, and a new subdivision b-one of section twenty-six
hundred six, approved by the electors on November second, two thousand ten,
shall take effect immediately, and thereafter shall control as provided with
respect to all the powers, functions and duties of officers, agencies and
employees, except as further specifically provided in other sections of this
charter, and, with respect to section one thousand fifty-seven-b, shall apply
to elections for the offices specified in such section held after such date;
provided, however, that the amendments to the charter, amending sections one
thousand fifty-six, one thousand fifty-seven and subdivision one of section
one thousand fifty-seven-a, repealing and reenacting section one thousand
fifty-four, repealing section one thousand fifty-five, and adding a new
subdivision e of section one thousand fifty-two and a new section eleven
hundred thirteen, approved by the electors on November second, two thousand
ten, shall take effect on the first day of January, two thousand eleven, and
thereafter shall control as provided with respect to all the powers,
functions and duties of officers, agencies and employees, except as further
specifically provided in other sections of this charter.



            (ii)   Officers and employees of the city shall
take any actions as are necessary and appropriate to prepare for the
implementation of such amendment prior to the effective date prescribed in
this subparagraph.



         (b)   Severability. If any clause, sentence,
subparagraph, paragraph, subdivision, section or part of the amendments
described in subparagraph (a) of this paragraph shall be adjudged by any
court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or otherwise cannot be
implemented pursuant to law, such judgment or inability to implement shall
not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof, but shall be confined
in its operation to the clause, sentence, subparagraph, paragraph,
subdivision, section or part thereof directly involved in the controversy in
which such judgment shall have been rendered or in the matter with respect to
which implementation may not occur.



   l.   (1)   [Repealed.]



      (2)   (a)   The amendments to the charter adding section
225-a and chapter 76, approved by the electors on November 6, 2018, shall
take effect on April 1, 2019, and thereafter shall control as provided with
respect to all the powers, functions and duties of officers, agencies and
employees, except as further specifically provided in other sections of this
charter.



         (b)   Officers and employees of the city shall take any
actions as are necessary and appropriate to prepare for the implementation of
such amendment prior to April 1. 2019.



      (3)   (a)   The amendments to the charter amending section
82 and subdivisions a and d of section 2800, approved by the electors on
November 6, 2018, shall take effect on January 1, 2019, and thereafter shall
control as provided with respect to all the powers, functions and duties of
officers, agencies and employees, except as further specifically provided in
other sections of this charter.



         (b)   Officers and employees of the city shall take any
actions as are necessary and appropriate to prepare for the implementation of
such amendment prior to such date.



      (4)   The amendments to the charter adding section 3203,
approved by the electors on November 6, 2018, shall take effect on April 1,
2019, and thereafter shall control as provided with respect to all the
powers, functions and duties of officers, agencies and employees, except as
further specifically provided in other sections of this charter. Officers and
employees of the city shall take any actions as are necessary and appropriate
to prepare for the implementation of such amendment prior to such date.



(Am. L.L. 2018/211, 12/3/2018; Am. L.L. 2019/001, 1/2/2019; Am. L.L.
2019/128, 7/14/2019)



Section 1153. Separability clause.



   If any provisions of this charter or of any amendments thereto shall be
held invalid or ineffective in whole or in part or inapplicable to any person
or situation, it is the purpose and intent of this charter that all other
provisions thereof shall nevertheless be separately and fully effective and
that the application of any such provision to other persons or situations
shall not be affected.



Section 1154. Short title.



   This charter shall be known and may be cited as "The New York city
charter."



Chapter 54: Collective Bargaining



Section 1170. Office of collective bargaining; director.



   There shall be an office of collective bargaining, the head of which
shall be the director of such office, who shall be the person holding the
office of chairman of the board of collective bargaining. The director may
appoint, and at pleasure remove, two deputies.



Section 1171. Board of collective bargaining.



   There shall be in the office of collective bargaining a board of
collective bargaining, which shall consist of seven members. Two members of
the board shall be city members, two members of the board shall be labor
members, and three members of the board, of whom one shall be chairman, shall
be impartial members. The mayor shall have the power to appoint the city
members of the board to serve at his pleasure, and the labor members of the
board from designations by the municipal labor committee. Each labor and city
member shall have an alternate, who shall be appointed and removed in the
same manner as the member for whom he is the alternate. The chairman and
other impartial members shall be elected by the unanimous vote of the city
and labor members, and shall serve for three year terms, provided, that of
the impartial members first elected, the chairman shall serve for a term
ending on January first, nineteen hundred seventy, one member shall serve for
a term ending on January first nineteen hundred sixty-nine, and one member
shall serve for a term ending on January first, nineteen hundred sixty-eight.



   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a labor member may not be
removed from the board except upon request of the municipal labor committee,
or except for cause, as hereinafter provided. Any member may be removed for
cause by a majority of the entire board, including at least one city member
and one labor member, after having been given a copy of the charges against
him and an opportunity to be heard in person or by counsel in his defense
upon not less than ten days' notice. Vacancies in the office of a city member
or a labor member shall be filled in the same manner as herein provided for
appointment. Vacancies in the office of an impartial member occurring
otherwise than by expiration of term shall be filled by unanimous vote of the
city and labor members for the unexpired balance of the term.



Section 1172. Board of certification.



   There shall be in the office of collective bargaining a board of
certification, which shall consist of the impartial members of the board of
collective bargaining. The chairman of the board of certification shall be
the person who is chairman of the board of collective bargaining.



Section 1173. Powers and duties.



   The office of collective bargaining, the board of collective bargaining
and the board of certification shall have such powers and duties with respect
to labor relations and collective bargaining as shall be prescribed by law.



Section 1174. Compensation.



   a.   Board of collective bargaining: board of certification;
director. The city members and the labor members of the board of collective
bargaining and their alternates shall serve without compensation. The
director shall be salaried for his or her services as director, chair of the
board of collective bargaining, and chair of the board of certification. The
impartial members, excluding the director, shall be paid a per diem fee to be
determined by the city members and labor members of the board of collective
bargaining. The director and all members of both such boards and their
alternates shall be entitled to receive reimbursement for their actual and
necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. Fifty per
cent of the salary, fees, and expenses provided for in this subdivision shall
be paid by members of the municipal committee, under rules and regulations
issued by the board of collective bargaining, which rules may provide how
such costs shall be distributed among such members.



   b.   Members of mediation and impasse panels; arbitrators. Members
of mediation and impasse panels, and arbitrators, shall be paid a per diem
fee to be determined by the board of collective bargaining, unless the
parties to the particular dispute shall have agreed to a different fee, and
shall be reimbursed for their actual and necessary expenses incurred in the
performance of their duties. The public employer and public employee
organization which are parties to the particular negotiation or grievance
shall each pay fifty percent of such fees and expenses and related expenses
incidental to the handling of deadlocked negotiations and unresolved
grievances.



   c.   Appointment of counsel and attorneys. The director may appoint
a counsel and attorneys, who, at the direction of the board of certification
or the board of collective bargaining may appear for and represent the office
of collective bargaining or either of the aforesaid boards in any legal
proceeding.



Section 1175. Publication of collective bargaining agreements.



   Not later than sixty calendar days after the execution of a collective
bargaining agreement, a copy shall be published in the City Record together
with a statement by the mayor (1) of the total costs and current and future
budgetary and economic consequences of the agreement and (2) of the
implications and likely impact of the agreement on the efficient management
of city agencies and the productivity of city employees.



Section 1176. Budgeting for agreements.



   a.   So far as practicable, each collective bargaining agreement
covering city employees shall be executed prior to the commencement of the
fiscal year during which its provisions shall first be in effect.



   b.   No part of any retroactive wage or salary settlement shall be
charged to the capital budget.



Section 1177. Agency participation.



   The heads of city agencies or their designated representatives shall
participate in the development of the city's position with respect to work
rules and practices and other matters affecting the management of each agency
in advance of collective bargaining negotiations affecting employees of an
agency.



Chapter 55: Department of Design and Construction



Section 1200. Department; commissioner.



   There shall be a department of design and construction, the head of
which shall be the commissioner of design and construction.



Section 1201. Deputies.



   The commissioner may appoint five deputies.



Section 1202. Powers and duties of the commissioner.



   a.   Except as otherwise required by state or federal law or by
direction of the mayor pursuant to subdivision b of this section, and
notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of this charter or the
administrative code, the commissioner shall have charge and control of and be
responsible for functions and operations and shall exercise powers of the
city relating to city construction projects. Such projects shall include but
not be limited to the design, construction and alteration of streets and
highways, bridges and tunnels, parks and recreational facilities, sewers and
sewage disposal plants, water supply and distribution structures, waste
management facilities, correctional facilities and all other public
buildings, structures and facilities. The commissioner shall also perform
responsibilities as the mayor shall direct with respect to the acquisition of
real or personal property in connection with construction or a capital
project, including responsibilities delegated elsewhere by the charter or the
administrative code, provided that the acquisition of real property shall be
made in the same manner as acquisitions made pursuant to subdivision three of
section sixteen hundred two of this charter.



   b.   Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of this section, the
mayor may assign in whole or in part operations and functions related to a
particular construction project or particular category or class of
construction projects to an agency other than the department of design and
construction, if the mayor determines that it is appropriate for such other
agency to perform such operations and functions.



Section 1203. Consultation with other agencies.



   In preparing and considering plans and specifications and in carrying
out such plans or specifications, the department shall consult with agencies
for whose use the building, structure or facility is intended and shall
consider any recommendations made by such agencies.



Section 1204. Right of entry.



   The commissioner, officers and employees of the department may, in
accordance with applicable law, enter upon public or private property for the
purpose of making surveys, test pits and borings or other investigations
necessary for the exercise of the powers or the performance of the duties of
the department. Refusal by the owner or the agent of such owner to permit
such entry shall be a misdemeanor and punishable by not more than thirty
days' imprisonment or a fine of not more than five hundred dollars, or both.



Section 1205. Powers and duties of other agencies.



   a.   Where state or federal law designates an agency other than the
department of design and construction to perform a function that would
otherwise be within the jurisdiction of the department of design and
construction pursuant to subdivision a of section twelve hundred two of this
chapter, such agency shall delegate such function to the department of design
and construction if such delegation may be made consistent with applicable
provisions of state or federal law.



   b.   Wherever the powers and duties of an agency other than the
department of design and construction as set forth in the charter or the
administrative code include city construction projects within the
jurisdiction of the commissioner of design and construction pursuant to
subdivision a of section twelve hundred two of this chapter, such powers and
duties shall be deemed to be within the jurisdiction of the department of
design and construction and shall be exercised by such department; provided
that such other agency may exercise such powers and duties pursuant to
subdivision b of such section or where required by state or federal law.



Section 1206. Mentoring program.



   1.   The department of design and construction may establish a
mentoring program for small businesses and minority and women owned business
enterprises that have been certified pursuant to section thirteen hundred
four of the charter in the construction trades. The department of design and
construction may determine the criteria pursuant to which a business shall be
eligible for and selected as a mentee business participating in the
components of such a program under paragraph c of subdivision five of this
section, the number of mentee businesses to participate in each such
component of such a program, the criteria for the competitive selection of
the firms that will provide mentoring services, and the assignment of a
mentor to a specific mentee business.



   2.   The department of design and construction shall be authorized,
notwithstanding any other provision of law:



      a.   to designate which eligible contracts shall be mentoring
program contracts under subparagraphs one and two of paragraph c of
subdivision five of this section, respectively;



      b.   to establish standards for qualifying mentee businesses
to compete for a mentoring program contract, provided that no less than two
qualified mentee businesses in the program must submit responsive offers to
perform the contract;



      c.   to determine when bids or proposals for a mentoring
program contract should be restricted to mentee businesses that, prior to the
receipt of bids or proposals, have been qualified for such competition;



      d.   to competitively select, designate and contract with one
or more experienced firms that, under the general supervision of the
department of design and construction, will provide mentoring services to the
mentee businesses, and to assign such mentors one or more designated mentee
businesses;



      e.   to assist mentee businesses that have been awarded
mentoring program contracts to obtain any surety bond or contract of
insurance required of them in connection with such contract only,
notwithstanding any provision of section two thousand five hundred four of
the insurance law to the contrary; and



      f.   in addition to the benefits of such program and
notwithstanding any other provision of law, to provide mentee businesses
technical assistance in obtaining bid, payment and performance bonding for
contracts that are not mentoring program contracts, for which the businesses
are otherwise qualified.



   3.   If the total number of qualified mentee businesses that respond
to a competition and are considered capable of meeting the specifications and
terms of the invitation to compete is less than two, or if the department of
design and construction determines that acceptance of the best offer will
result in the payment of an unreasonable price, the department of design and
construction shall reject all offers and withdraw the designation of the
contract as a mentoring program contract. If the department of design and
construction withdraws the designation of the contract as a mentoring program
contract, the mentee businesses, if any, that made offers shall be notified.



   4.   A mentor shall provide services and assistance to a mentee
business as designated by the department of design and construction, which
may include the following:



      a.   provide business training in the skills necessary to
operate a successful business and to compete for and perform a contract;



      b.   provide technical assistance to the mentee business to
assess the outcome if the mentee business competes for but is not awarded a
contract;



      c.   if the mentoring program contract is awarded to the
mentee business, provide guidance, advice and technical assistance to the
mentee business in the performance of the contract; and



      d.   provide other technical assistance to the mentee business
to facilitate learning, training and other issues which may arise.



   5.   As used in this section:



      a.   "Small business" means a business which (1) is
independently owned and operated; and (2) has annual revenues not exceeding a
fiscal limitation of five million dollars or such lesser amount as
established by the department of design and construction pursuant to this
section.



      b.   "Mentoring program contract" means a contract designated
by the department of design and construction, in an estimated amount of not
more than one million five hundred thousand dollars for contracts under
subparagraph one of paragraph c of this subdivision and three million dollars
for contracts under subparagraph two of such paragraph, for which bids or
proposals are to be invited and accepted only from businesses that are
enrolled in a mentoring program and have been selected by the department of
design and construction to compete for the contract.



      c.   "Mentoring program" is a program established pursuant to
this section to provide mentee businesses with the opportunity:



         (1)    or up to four years, to compete for and, where
awarded, to perform certain contracts designated for inclusion in the
mentoring program, with the assistance of a competitively selected mentor
firm that has extensive management and mentoring experience, with the mentor
providing the mentee business with advice and assistance in competing for and
managing contracts; and



         (2)   for a mentee business that the department of
design and construction has determined has successfully completed the program
under subparagraph one of this paragraph, for up to four additional years,
(A) additional opportunities to compete with other designated mentee
businesses in the program for certain contracts to be designated for
inclusion under this subparagraph and, where awarded, to perform such
contracts, with the further assistance of a competitively selected mentor
firm that has extensive management and mentoring experience, with the mentor
providing the mentee with advice and technical assistance in competing for
and managing contracts, and (B) assistance, as determined by the department
of design and construction, for such a mentee business to obtain bonding for
contracts that are competitively awarded pursuant to any other provision of
law.



   6.   Commencing on October first, two thousand twenty, the
department of design and construction shall submit an annual report to the
governor and the legislature that contains the following information for the
preceding city fiscal year:



      a.   the total number and total dollar value of mentoring
program contracts; and



      b.   mentoring program participation rates.



(2019 N.Y. Laws Ch. 98, 7/15/2019)



Chapter 56: Department of Small Business Services



Section 1300. Department; commissioner.



   There shall be a department of small business services, the head of
which shall be the commissioner of small business services. The commissioner
may appoint deputies within available appropriations.



Section 1301. Powers and duties of the commissioner.



   Except as otherwise provided by law, the commissioner shall have charge
and control of and be responsible for all functions and operations of the
city relating to business and economic development, the enhancement of
economic development and financial opportunity for minority and women owned
business enterprises, and ensuring equal employment opportunity by city
contractors. Such powers and functions shall include, without limitation, the
following:



      1.   With respect to business and economic development
generally the commissioner shall have the power and duty:



         a.   to establish business, industrial and commercial
policies, programs and projects which affect the business, industrial,
commercial or economic well-being, development, growth and expansion of the
economic life of the city;



         b.   to serve as liaison for the city with local
development corporations, other not-for-profit corporations and all other
entities involved in economic development within the city. In furtherance of
this function, the department shall include in any contract with a contracted
entity, as defined by section 22-821 of the administrative code, under which
such contracted entity is engaged in providing or administering economic
development benefits on behalf of the city and expending city capital
appropriations in connection therewith, the provisions required by subchapter
2 of chapter 8 of title 22 of the administrative code.



         b-1.   [Repealed.]



         b-2.   By August 1, 2017, and by August 1 every year
thereafter, the entity under contract with the department to provide or
administer economic development benefits on behalf of the city shall assess
and evaluate each business entity to which it provided assistance in the form
of a loan, grant or tax benefit in excess of one hundred fifty thousand
dollars, or sale or lease of city-owned land for a project expected, in
accordance with information provided by the applicant for the sale or lease,
to retain or create not less than twenty-five jobs, to determine whether they
met minority and women-owned business goals, if any, pursuant to the
contract. The findings of such assessments shall be submitted to the
department on or before November 1, 2017, and on November 1 every year
thereafter. By January 30, 2018, and by January 1 every year thereafter, the
department shall submit such assessment and evaluation to the mayor and the
speaker of the council, which shall include, but not be limited to: (i) a
list of all recipients of such economic development benefits; (ii) the
minority and women-owned business goals for these recipients; (iii) whether
the recipient conducted a good faith effort to identify and utilize minority
and women-owned businesses to achieve such goals; and (iv) if minority and
women-owned business contracting goals were not met by a recipient, a
description of the reasons the goals were not met.



         c.   to study, organize, promote, coordinate and carry
out within or without the city, activities, projects and programs designed to
encourage, stimulate and foster the well-being, development, growth and
expansion of business, industry and commerce in the city, and the enhancement
and protection of the eonomic life of the city;



         d.   to assist, encourage and promote broadened employee
ownership, particularly through the use of employee stock ownership plans and
producer cooperatives, by conducting research, outreach and public
informational programs pertaining to employee ownership and employee stock
ownership plans; by providing technical assistance to employee groups
exploring an employee buyout, where such an action might be instrumental in
retaining a business within the city of New York; and by ensuring that firms
applying for financial assistance from any entity involved with economic
development in the city of New York shall be correctly advised as to the
potential advantages of forming an employee stock ownership plan;



         e.   to serve as a clearinghouse in connection with
efforts to devise solutions for problems affecting business, industry and
commerce in the city;



         f.   to promote and encourage the expansion and
development of markets for city products;



         g.   to promote and encourage the location and
development of new business and industry in the city, as well as the
maintenance and expansion of existing business and industry, and for this
purpose to cooperate with public and private agencies, organizations and
individuals;



         h.   to promote, coordinate and implement activities,
projects and programs designed to attract foreign direct investment and
promote overseas sales by firms in the city and to otherwise encourage,
stimulate and foster the well-being, development, growth, and expansion of
international business, commerce, and trade in the city;



         i.   to administer and promote the development of
foreign trade zones within the city;



         j.   to study conditions affecting business, industry
and commerce in the city, and to collect and disseminate such information,
make such studies and carry on such educational activities as may be
necessary or useful in relation to the promotion and development of business,
industry and commerce in the city;



         k.   to maintain a business information service in order
to assist business and industry in the city, and to encourage business and
industry outside of the city to patronize the business and industrial
establishments of the city;



         l.   to make, from time to time, recommendations to the
mayor concerning steps deemed advisable for the promotion and advancement of
business and industrial prosperity in the city and the elimination of
restrictions, burdens and handicapping factors having an adverse effect on
business, industry and commerce in the city;



         m.   to publicize the economic advantages and other
factors which make the city a desirable location for business and industry;



         n.   to collect information and compile and distribute
literature and publicity material dealing with the facilities, advantages and
attractions of the city and the historic and scenic points and places of
interest therein;



         o.   to plan and conduct publicity and information
programs designed to attract tourists, vacationers, visitors and other
interested persons to the city, and to encourage, coordinate and cooperate
with the efforts of public and private agencies, organizations and groups to
publicize the advantages and attractions of the city for such purposes;



         p.   to encourage and cooperate with the efforts of
public and private agencies, organizations and groups in publicizing the
business, industrial and commercial advantages of the city;



         q.   to cooperate with and assist any corporation,
organization, agency or instrumentality, whether public or private, the
objects of which include, or which is authorized to act for, the advancement
of the business and industrial prosperity and economic welfare of the city,
or the furnishing of assistance in the location of new business and industry
therein, or the rehabilitation or expansion of existing business and industry
therein, or the creation of job opportunities or additional employment
therein, so as to provide support for any action, efforts or activities for
the accomplishment of any such purposes in the city on the part of any such
corporation, organization, agency or instrumentality; and



         r.   to issue permits for the taking of motion pictures,
and for the taking of photographs and for the use or operation of television
cameras and/or any other transmitting television equipment in or about city
property, or in or about any street, park, marginal street, pier, wharf,
dock, bridge or tunnel within the jurisdiction of any city department or
agency or involving the use of any city owned or maintained facilities or
equipment.



      2.   The commissioner shall have the power and duty to
exercise the functions of the city relating to the development,
redevelopment, construction, reconstruction, operation, maintenance,
management, administration and regulation of public markets, wharf property,
water front property and airports within the city of New York including,
without limitation, the following:



         a.   to have exclusive charge and control of the public
markets of the city, to fix fees for services, licenses and privileges in
connection therewith, to rent space therein and to enter into leases
therefor, and to regulate all facilities in use as public markets for the
public health, safety and welfare;



         b.   to have exclusive charge and control of the wharf
property and water front owned by the city and of the building, rebuilding,
repairing, altering, maintaining, strengthening, protecting, cleaning,
dredging, and deepening of such wharf property and water front property;
provided, that the commissioner may, subject to the approval of the mayor,
designate parcels of wharf property and water front property to be managed
pursuant to this paragraph and leased or permitted pursuant to paragraphs g
and h of this subdivision by the commissioner of citywide administrative
services. Any such designation shall be made in writing and may be withdrawn
by the commissioner subject to the approval of the mayor;



         c.   to have the exclusive power to enforce with respect
to public markets, water front property and any structures on water front
property under its jurisdiction, the labor law and such other laws, rules and
regulations as may govern the dredging, filling, removal, construction,
alteration, maintenance, use, occupancy, safety, sanitary conditions,
mechanical equipment and inspection of structures in the city, and the
issuance of permits and certificates of completion in reference thereto, and
to establish and amend fees to be charged for the issuance of such permits or
certificates of completion, which fees shall be established by the rules of
the commissioner;



         d.   to have exclusive power to regulate water front
property and the following structures on any water front property: wharves,
piers, docks, bulkheads, structures wholly or partly therein, and such other
structures used in conjunction with and in furtherance of water front
commerce and/or navigation;



         e.   to have exclusive power to regulate the use of
marginal streets so that they may be used to the best advantage in connection
with wharf property and to regulate by license or otherwise the transfer of
goods and merchandise upon, over or under all such marginal streets;



         f.   to lease, subject to the approval of the council,
any wharf property belonging to the city primarily for purposes of water
front commerce or in furtherance of navigation. Such leases may be sold at
public auction duly advertised in the City Record for at least ten days prior
thereto, and if not so sold the terms of any lease must be approved by the
council by a three-fourths vote after a public hearing, notice of which shall
be published in the City Record for the six days of publication of the City
Record immediately prior thereto. All such leases shall be for such terms and
shall contain such conditions as may be provided by law. The council shall
act within forty-five days of the filing of the proposed terms and conditions
of any such lease with the council. Failure of the council to act on a lease
within such forty-five day period shall be deemed an approval of such lease.
All votes of the council pursuant to this subdivision shall be filed by the
council with the mayor and shall be final unless disapproved by the mayor
within five days of such filing except that there shall be no right of
mayoral disapproval if a three-fourths vote of the council is required
pursuant to this subdivision. Any such mayoral disapproval shall be filed by
the mayor with the council and shall be subject to override by a two-thirds
vote of the council within ten days of such filing;



         g.   to lease, pursuant to review and approval pursuant
to sections one hundred ninety-seven-c and one hundred ninety-seven-d, any
wharf property belonging to the city for purposes other than water front
commerce or in furtherance of navigation, including, without limitation,
commercial, industrial, residential or recreational purposes. All such leases
shall be for such terms and shall contain such conditions as may be provided
by law. No such lease may be authorized by the commissioner until a public
hearing has been held with respect thereto after the publication of notice in
the City Record at least thirty days in advance of such hearing;



         h.   to grant temporary permits terminable at will for a
period not exceeding three years for the purposes of water front commerce or
in furtherance of navigation and not exceeding one year for other purposes to
use and occupy any wharf property belonging to the city;



         i.   to set aside by order any wharf property belonging
to the city, which has not been leased, for general wharfage purposes or for
the use of any special kind of commerce, or of any class of vessel, or of any
agency, and to revoke or modify such order as to any such wharf property at
any time;



         j.   to regulate the charges for wharfage, cranage and
dockage of all vessels or floating structures using any wharf property set
aside under paragraph i of this subdivision, provided that the rates which it
shall be lawful to charge for wharfage, cranage and dockage from any vessel
or floating structure which makes use of any other wharf property within the
port of New York shall be fixed by rules of the commissioner;



         k.   to sell buildings, structures and other
improvements on market property and wharf property to a person leasing such
property pursuant to paragraphs a, f and g of this subdivision; provided,
however, that any such sale of improvements shall be subject to the procedure
for review and approval applicable to the lease related to the improvements;



         l.   to manage and promote the economic development of
all airports, airplane landing sites, seaplane bases and heliports owned by
the city, and to lease such property, subject to review and approval pursuant
to sections one hundred ninety-seven-c and one hundred ninety-seven-d. No
such lease may be authorized by the commissioner until a public hearing has
been held with respect thereto after the publication of notice in the City
Record at least thirty days in advance of such hearing;



         m.   except as provided in section 487, to have charge
and control of the regulation for the health and safety of the general public
of all airports, airplane landing sites, seaplane bases, heliports, marginal
streets and parking facilities appurtenant thereto owned by the city;



         n.   except as provided in section 487, to establish,
amend and enforce rules for the proper care and use of all public markets,
wharf property, water front property and all airports, airplane landing
sites, seaplane bases and heliports owned by the city and placed in his or
her charge or over which he or she shall have power of regulation, and to
issue such orders as may be necessary for such enforcement. The violation of
or the failure to comply with any such order or rule shall be triable in
criminal court and punishable, upon conviction, by not more than thirty days
imprisonment or by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars nor more than
five thousand dollars, or both;



         o.   except as provided in section 487, to have the
exclusive power to regulate all privately owned airports, airplane landing
sites, seaplane bases and heliports and the operation out of and into such
bases as well as the control of ground effect craft and aircraft operations
to or from other sites within the city not so designated as airports,
heliports, airplane landing sites or seaplane bases;



         p.   to promote and encourage the expansion and
development of the city as a center for intrastate, interstate and
international overland freight transportation; and



         q.   to administer and enforce the provisions of the
zoning resolution of the city of New York in respect to the following
structures on any water front property: wharves, piers, docks, bulkheads,
structures wholly or partly thereon, and such other structures used in
conjunction with and in furtherance of water front commerce and/or navigation
in the same manner and in accordance with the same procedure as is prescribed
therein.



      3.   With respect to energy matters, the commissioner shall
have the power and duty:



         a.   to plan, formulate, coordinate and advance energy
policy for the city;



         b.   to analyze the energy and fuel needs of the city
with respect to all kinds of energy, to prepare intermediate and long-range
plans, goals and programs designed to meet such needs, and to establish
priorities among them;



         c.   to develop, implement and manage energy-related
programs for economic development and other purposes, including, without
limitation, the administration of the public utility service established by
section 22-301 of the administrative code, and to exercise all of the
functions, powers and duties of such public utility service; and



         d.   to perform such other responsibilities with respect
to energy matters, including responsibilities delegated elsewhere by the
charter, as the mayor shall direct.



      4.   For purposes of subdivision three of this section,
"energy" shall include work or heat that is, or may be, produced from any
fuel or source, including but not limited to electrical, fossil, geothermal,
wind, hydro, solid waste, tidal, solar and nuclear.



      5.   The commissioner shall have the power and duty to:



         a.   advise and assist the mayor in developing policies
designed to meet the job training and employment needs of the economically
disadvantaged and unemployed residents of the city of New York, as well as
the labor needs of private industry;



         b.   provide job training and employment services for
economically disadvantaged and unemployed residents of the city of New York;



         c.   disburse available city, state and federal funds
for job training and employment programs throughout the city, and, when
practical, to coordinate such funds with available funding from the private
sector;



         d.   maintain, operate and control such programs as may
be necessary or required to achieve the objectives of the department;



         e.   promote cooperation among business, labor and
community organizations in response to labor market conditions; and



         f.   promote public awareness of resources available for
the economically disadvantaged and unemployed, and to refer the public to
appropriate job training and employment services.



(Am. L.L. 2016/003, 1/5/2016; Am. L.L. 2016/109, 9/28/2016; Am. L.L.
2017/222, 12/1/2017, eff. 1/15/2018)



Section 1302. Waterfront plans.



   a.   No marginal street, bulkhead line, pierhead line or other
similar line demarcating the extent of waterfront development may be
delineated, established or changed by the commissioner except in accordance
with sections one hundred ninety-eight and one hundred ninety-nine of this
charter. Any existing waterfront plan containing such lines shall be
continued in effect and may similarly be changed only in accordance with
sections one hundred ninety-eight and one hundred ninety-nine. The
commissioner may apply to the city planning commission to incorporate such
existing plans for the water front or any portion thereof into the city map
pursuant to the procedure for review and approval of a change to the city
map. Any plans for the water front or portions thereof so incorporated shall
thereafter be discontinued as separate plans.



   b.   No wharf, pier, bulkhead, basin, dock, slip, marginal street or
other structure shall be laid out, built, or rebuilt in the port of New York
in the area subject to the jurisdiction of the commissioner except in
accordance with such plans as changed from time to time, provided, that the
commissioner, with the approval of the council, may from time to time change
the width or location of any of the piers laid down on such plans and build
or rebuild temporary wharf structures or license or permit the building or
rebuilding thereof as may be provided by law.



   c.   The commissioner may widen, open, construct, abandon or close
any marginal street or avenue included in such plans and shall maintain the
widened portion of such street or avenue, or the new street or avenue as a
marginal street, and such new street, or such a widened street to the extent
of the portion so widened, shall not be a public street. Before acting under
this subdivision, the commissioner shall make a report to the city planning
commission including a map showing any proposed change and such other
information as the chair of the city planning commission shall require. If
the city planning commission makes a finding that the proposed change is in
accordance with the water front plan or approves the change, the commissioner
may proceed with it, but if the city planning commission makes a finding that
it is not in accordance with such plan and disapproves the change, then the
commissioner shall not proceed unless the council by a two-thirds vote
authorizes the commissioner to proceed. The city planning commission shall
act on such change within six weeks from the time when it is filed in the
office of the commission and if it does not act within such six weeks period
the commissioner may proceed with the change.



Section 1303. Waterfront management advisory board.



   a.   There shall be a waterfront management advisory board, which
shall consist of one member from within the office of the mayor as designated
by the mayor; the commissioner of small business services; the chairperson of
the city planning commission; the commissioner of environmental protection;
the commissioner of parks and recreation; the commissioner of housing
preservation and development; two city council members to be designated by
the speaker of the city council; nine members to be appointed by the mayor
and nine members to be appointed by the speaker, provided that the mayor and
the speaker each appoint at least one member from each borough. Appointed
members shall include representatives of various organizations, industries
and advocates interested in the industrial, commercial, residential,
recreational or other use or development of the waterfront. The mayor, after
consultation with the speaker, shall designate from among the ex officio
members a chairperson. The mayor may designate additional members of the
mayor's office or any mayoral agency as non-voting members of the board.



   b.   Appointed members of the board shall not hold any other public
office or employment and shall be appointed for terms of three years without
compensation, except that of the members first appointed, three mayoral and
three speaker appointees shall be appointed for terms of one year, three
mayoral and three speaker appointees shall be appointed for terms of two
years and three mayoral and three speaker appointees shall be appointed for
terms of three years. No appointed member may be removed other than for cause
to be determined after a hearing before the office of administrative trials
and hearings.



   c.   In the event of a vacancy on the board during the term of
office of an appointed member, the officer that appointed such member shall
appoint a successor to serve the balance of the unexpired term.



   d.   The ex officio and council members of the board may designate a
representative who shall be counted as a member for the purpose of
determining the existence of a quorum and who may vote on behalf of such
member. The designation of a representative shall be made by a written notice
of the ex officio or council member served upon the chairperson prior to the
designee participating in any meeting of the board, but such designation may
be rescinded or revised by the member at any time. The commissioner of small
business services may designate as his or her representative the president of
the economic development corporation or the designee of the president.



   e.   The board shall (i) hold at least one meeting every quarter;
(ii) consult with and, upon request of the mayor or any city agency, advise
the mayor or such agency on any matter relating to the industrial,
commercial, residential, recreational or other use or development of wharves,
waterfront property and waterfront infrastructure in the city, and on other
matters as may be requested by the chairperson; (iii) create any committees
or subcommittees consisting of at least one board member or their designated
representative as the board deems appropriate to carry out the board's
responsibilities, provided that there shall be a committee on recreational
uses of the waterfront; (iv) invite, at the discretion of the chairperson,
representatives of federal, state, or multi-state agencies, authorities or
other instrumentalities to participate as non-voting members; (v) assist,
upon request of the director of city planning, and provide advice in the
drafting of the comprehensive waterfront plan pursuant to section 205 of the
charter; (vi) prepare and submit reports to the mayor and speaker, when
deemed appropriate by the chairperson, on any issue relating to the
industrial, commercial, residential, recreational or other use or development
of wharves, waterfront property and waterfront infrastructure in the city;
and (vii) by January 31 of each year, issue a report to the mayor and
speaker, and post on the website of the city, that describes each meeting
held by the board and any other activities undertaken by the board for the
immediately preceding year.



(Am. L.L. 2016/096, 8/31/2016, eff. 12/29/2016)



Section 1304. Division of Economic and Financial Opportunity.



   There shall be a division of economic and financial opportunity within
the department.



   a.   The purpose of the division shall be to enhance the ability of
minority and women owned business enterprises and emerging business
enterprises to compete for city contracts, to enhance city agencies'
awareness of such business enterprises, and to ensure their meaningful
participation in city procurement.



   b.   The commissioner shall administer, coordinate, and enforce a
citywide program established by local law for the identification,
recruitment, certification and participation in city procurement of minority
and women owned business enterprises and emerging business enterprises.



   c.   The commissioner shall be authorized to promulgate rules
necessary to implement the purposes of such local law. The commissioner shall
consult with the procurement policy board in drafting and adopting such
rules. Such rules shall define sanctions, consistent with local law, which
are appropriate to remedy violations or penalize contractors for failure to
comply with the provisions of local law or with any program or rule
established pursuant to local law.



   d.   The commissioner shall monitor the implementation of all
financial, technical, managerial, and bonding assistance programs operated by
city agencies to enhance participation by minority and women owned business
enterprises and emerging business enterprises in city procurement.



   e.   The commissioner shall have the following powers and duties to
implement the purposes of this section:



      1.   to direct and assist agencies in their efforts to
increase participation by minority and women owned business enterprises and
emerging business enterprises as contractors and subcontractors in city
procurement;



      2.   to develop standardized forms and reporting documents;



      3.   to conduct, coordinate and facilitate technical
assistance and educational programs;



      4.   to periodically review the compliance of city agencies
with the provisions of local law for the identification, recruitment,
certification and participation in city procurement of minority and women
owned business enterprises and emerging business enterprises;



      5.   to annually report to the mayor and the council, as
required by such local law, on the activities of the division and efforts by
agencies to comply with the provisions of such local law;



      6.   a.   to establish and operate, on behalf of the city,
a centralized program for the certification of minority owned business
enterprises, women owned business enterprises and emerging business
enterprises for the purposes of establishing the eligibility of such
businesses for participation in the programs and processes established
pursuant to local law to ensure their meaningful participation in city
procurement.



         b.   For the purposes of such certification, "minority
owned business enterprise" and "women owned business enterprise" shall mean
business enterprises authorized to do business in this state, including sole
proprietorships, partnerships and corporations, in which (i) at least
fifty-one percent of the ownership interest is held by United States citizens
or permanent resident aliens who are either minority group members or women,
(ii) the ownership interest of such individuals is real, substantial and
continuing, and (iii) such individuals have and exercise the authority to
control independently the day to day business decisions of the enterprise;



         c.   For the purposes of such certification, "emerging
business enterprise" shall mean a business enterprise authorized to do
business in this state, including sole proprietorships, partnerships and
corporations, in which (i) at least fifty-one percent of the ownership
interest is held by United States citizens or permanent resident aliens; (ii)
the ownership interest of such individuals is real, substantial and
continuing, (iii) such individuals have and exercise the authority to control
independently the day to day business decisions of the enterprise; and (iv)
such individuals have demonstrated, in accordance with regulations
promulgated by the commissioner, that they are socially and economically
disadvantaged. An individual who is "socially and economically disadvantaged"
shall mean an individual who has experienced social disadvantage in American
society as a result of causes not common to individuals who are not socially
disadvantaged, and whose ability to compete in the free enterprise system has
been impaired due to diminished capital and credit opportunities as compared
to others in the same business area who are not socially disadvantaged. An
individual's race, national origin, or gender by itself, shall not qualify
the individual as "socially disadvantaged." In drafting such regulations, the
commissioner shall consider criteria developed for federal programs
established to promote opportunities for businesses owned by individuals who
are socially and economically disadvantaged, including criteria for
determining initial and continued eligibility in relation to the net worth of
individuals claiming to be economically disadvantaged, provided that the net
worth of an individual claiming disadvantage pursuant to this section must be
less than one million dollars. In determining such net worth, the department
shall exclude the ownership interest in the business enterprise and the
equity in the primary personal residence.



         d.   To be eligible for certification, a business
enterprise shall have a real and substantial business presence in the market
for the city of New York, as defined by the commissioner pursuant to local
law.



         e.   The commissioner of small business services may
provide by rule criteria and procedures for firms certified as minority owned
businesses and women owned businesses by other governmental entities to be
recognized as certified business enterprises by the city of New York.



      7.   to conduct site visits at business enterprises seeking
certification, the basis for which shall be provided by rule, to verify that
such business enterprises are eligible for certification;



      8.   to audit such certified business enterprises and
periodically review and in appropriate cases recertify their eligibility for
participation in programs established pursuant to local law;



      9.   to direct and assist city agencies in their efforts to
increase participation by minority owned business enterprises, women owned
business enterprises and emerging business enterprises in any city-operated
financial, technical, and management assistance program;



      10.   to assist all business enterprises certified pursuant to
this section in becoming prequalified for all categories of procurement for
which they may be eligible and for which contracting agencies utilize
prequalification in the procurement process;



      11.   to prepare, periodically update, and post on the website
of the division a directory of such city certified business enterprises for
use by city agencies and contractors, which shall include information for
each such business enterprise, as applicable, including but not limited to:
(i) identification of the market sector in which the business enterprise
operates; (ii) the bonding capacity of the business enterprise; (iii) the
contract price and specific tasks performed by the business enterprise for
its last three contracts; (iv) the union affiliation, if any, of the
certified business enterprise; and (v) the renewal date for certification;



      12.   to develop a clearinghouse of information on programs
and services available to such business enterprises; and



      13.   to provide such assistance to business enterprises
interested in being certified as is needed to ensure that such businesses
benefit from city technical, managerial, and financial assistance, and other
business development programs.



   f.   Responsibilities of the city agencies. The head of each city
agency shall:



      1.   establish and implement reasonable measures and
procedures to secure the meaningful participation of city certified business
enterprises in the agency's (1) procurement of goods, services and
construction and (2) financial, technical and managerial assistance programs
for such business enterprises;



      2.   monitor all city contracts under the agency's
jurisdiction for compliance with programs and policies established pursuant
to local law, and refer and recommend appropriate matters to the division of
economic and financial opportunity and the law department;



      3.   designate a deputy commissioner or other executive
officer to advise the commissioner concerning the activities of the agency in
carrying out its responsibilities pursuant to local law;



      4.   cooperate with and furnish to the division such
information and assistance as may be required in the performance of the
division's functions under this section and local law and the rules
promulgated thereunder;



      5.   make available to prospective bidders a current copy of
the directory of city certified businesses; and



      6.   periodically report to the division on activities
undertaken to promote and increase participation by city-certified businesses
in its procurement and any financial, technical, or management assistance
program which it administers.



   g.   Small and locally-based business enterprises. In addition to
the purposes provided in this section, the division of economic and financial
opportunity, or such other bureau or division of the department as the
commissioner may designate, shall administer any programs for small or
locally-based business enterprise programs as may be established by law. The
division of economic and financial opportunity or such other bureau or
division shall, pursuant to applicable local laws, certify such enterprises
as are eligible to participate in such programs, periodically review and
recertify their eligibility, audit business enterprises that participate in
such programs, and publish a directory of participating enterprises.



Section 1305. Division of Labor Services.



   There shall be a division of labor services within the department.



   a.   The commissioner shall administer the provisions of this
section and enforce a citywide program to ensure that city contractors and
subcontractors take appropriate action to ensure that women and minority
group members are afforded equal employment opportunity, and that all persons
are protected from discrimination prohibited under the provisions of federal,
state and local laws and executive orders with regard to recruitment,
employment, job assignment, promotion, upgrading, demotion, transfer, layoff,
termination, rates of pay and other forms of compensation. The commissioner
may request and shall receive from any contracting agency of the city such
assistance as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this section.
"Minority group member" shall mean a United States citizen or permanent
resident alien who is a member of a racial or language minority group in New
York city protected by the voting rights act of 1965, as amended, or such
other groups as may be covered by rule of the agency.



   b.   The commissioner shall promulgate such rules as are necessary
to implement the purposes of this section. The commissioner shall consult
with the procurement policy board in drafting and adopting such rules.



   c.   The commissioner shall have the following powers and duties:



      1.   to implement, monitor compliance with, and enforce this
section and programs established pursuant to local, state and federal law and
executive order requiring contractors to provide equal employment opportunity;



      2.   to implement, monitor compliance with, and enforce
on-the-job training requirements on construction projects;



      3.   to monitor compliance by contractors with state and
federal prevailing wage requirements;



      4.   to advise and assist contractors, subcontractors and
labor unions with respect to their obligations to provide equal employment
opportunity;



      5.   to establish appropriate advisory committees;



      6.   to serve as a city liaison to federal, state and local
agencies responsible for contractors' and subcontractors' compliance with
equal employment opportunity; and



      7.   such other powers and duties as may be conferred on the
division by law or executive order for the purpose of ensuring that persons
or businesses which benefit from doing business with the city provide equal
employment opportunity.



   d.   The commissioner shall develop appropriate language for
inclusion in city contracts regarding the subject matter of this section.
Such contract language shall be reviewed by the corporation counsel. Such
contract language shall require that a contractor:



      1.   shall not discriminate against any individual in
violation of any federal, state or local law;



      2.   shall inform any employee representatives authorized to
bargain collectively for its employees of the contractor's obligations
pursuant to this section, and negotiate with such representatives to obtain
their cooperation in the implementation of such obligations;



      3.   shall require that any subcontractor it employs in the
performance of the contract comply with the requirements of this section.



   e.   1.   The commissioner shall require employment reports to be
submitted in such form and containing such information as the commissioner
may prescribe, by contractors to whom agencies propose to award city
contracts and their proposed subcontractors, when such contracts or
subcontracts have a value above a monetary threshold that the commissioner
shall by rule establish. The commissioner may by rule provide for appropriate
exemptions from such requirements.



      2.   An employment report shall include, but not be limited
to, employment practices, policies and procedures, including those related to
preventing and addressing sexual harassment, statistics and collective
bargaining agreements. The contracting agency shall transmit the employment
report to the commissioner after the selection of a proposed contractor or
subcontractor. The commissioner shall review all employment reports to
determine whether such contractors and subcontractors are in compliance with
the equal employment opportunity requirement of local, state and federal law
and executive orders.



      3.   Except as provided in paragraphs 4, 5 and 6 of this
subdivision, a contracting agency may award the contract or approve a
subcontractor upon receiving the approval of the division, or after a number
of days to be specified by rule have passed since it submitted the employment
report of the proposed contractor to the division, whichever is sooner.



      4.   If the commissioner notifies the contracting agency that
a proposed contractor or subcontractor has failed to submit a complete
employment report, the commissioner shall require the contracting agency not
to award the contract or approve the subcontractor until after a complete
employment report has been submitted to the division for its review.



      5.   If the commissioner notifies the contracting agency that
the division has reason to believe that the contractor or subcontractor is
not in substantial compliance with the requirements of this section, the
commissioner may require the contracting agency not to award the contract or
approve the subcontractor until the contractor has agreed to take appropriate
action to come into compliance with such requirements.



      6.   The commissioner may by rule provide for circumstances
when a contract or subcontract may be awarded without the prior approval of
the division, which shall include but not be limited to requirements
contracts which may be awarded prior to the approval of an employment report,
subject to the condition that a purchase shall not be made under the contract
until the division has approved the employment report, emergency contracts,
and contracts with contractors or subcontractors for which the division has
previously approved an employment report.



      7.   The time schedules for actions required to be taken
pursuant to this section shall be defined by rule of the procurement policy
board in accordance with the provisions of section three hundred eleven.



   f.   Periodic review. The commissioner may require contractors or
subcontractors to file periodic employment reports after the award of a
contract in such form and with such frequency as the commissioner may direct
by rule to determine whether such contractors or subcontractors are in
compliance with applicable legal requirements and the provisions of this
section.



   g.   Responsibilities of city agencies. The head of each city,
county, borough or other office, position, administration, board, department,
division, commission, bureau, corporation, authority, or other agency of
government, where the majority of board members are appointed directly or
indirectly by the mayor or serve by virtue of being city officers, or the
expenses of which are paid in whole or in part from the city treasury,
including the board of education, city and community colleges, the financial
services corporation, the health and hospitals corporation, the public
development corporation, school boards, and the city housing authority, shall:



      1.   assist the division in monitoring compliance with the
equal employment opportunity requirements of contracts under its jurisdiction
and refer and recommend matters to the division with respect to
non-compliance with the provisions of this section;



      2.   designate a deputy commissioner or other executive
officer to advise the commissioner concerning the activities and progress of
the agency in carrying out its responsibilities pursuant to this section; and



      3.   in accordance with the provisions of section three
hundred thirty-five, impose remedies and sanctions for failure to comply with
the requirements included in city contracts pursuant to this section.



   h.   Enforcement, remedies and sanctions. Upon receiving a complaint
or at its own instance, the commissioner may conduct such investigation as
may be necessary to determine whether contractors and subcontractors are in
compliance with the equal employment opportunity requirements of federal,
state and local laws and executive orders. If the commissioner has reason to
believe that a contractor or subcontractor is not in compliance with the
provisions of this section, the commissioner shall seek the contractor's or
subcontractor's agreement to adopt and adhere to an employment program
designed to ensure equal employment opportunity, including but not limited to
measures designed to remedy underutilization of minorities and women in the
contractor's or subcontractor's workforce, and may, in addition, recommend to
the contracting agency that payments to the contractor be suspended pending a
determination of the contractor's or subcontractor's compliance with such
requirements. If the contractor or subcontractor does not agree to adopt or
does not adhere to such a program, the commissioner shall make a
determination as to whether the contractor or subcontractor is in compliance
with the provisions of this section, and shall notify the head of the
contracting agency of such determination and any sanctions, including
withholding of payment, imposition of an employment program, or other
sanction or remedy provided by law or by contract, which the executive
director believes should be imposed. The head of the contracting agency shall
impose such sanction unless he or she notifies the commissioner in writing
that the agency head does not agree with the recommendation, in which case
the commissioner and the head of the contracting agency shall jointly
determine any sanction to be imposed. If the agency head and the commissioner
do not agree on the sanction to be imposed, the matter shall be referred to
the mayor, who shall determine any sanction to be imposed.



   i.   Confidentiality. To the extent permitted by law and consistent
with the proper discharge of the division's responsibilities under this
section all information provided by a contractor to the division shall be
confidential.



   j.   This section shall not apply:



      1.   to contracts for financial or other assistance between
the city and a government or governmental agency;



      2.   to contracts, resolutions, indentures, declarations of
trust, or other instruments authorizing or relating to the authorization,
issuance, award, and sale of bonds, certificates of indebtedness, notes or
other fiscal obligations of the city, or consisting thereof, except as
otherwise provided by law or executive order; or



      3.   to employment by the city of its officers and employees
which is subject to equal employment opportunity requirements of applicable
law.



(Am. L.L. 2018/102, 5/9/2018, eff. 7/8/2018)



Section 1306. The New York city public utility service.



   The commissioner or his or her designee shall serve as the director of
the public utility service established by section 22-301 of the
administrative code.



Section 1307. Dedicated small business advocates.



   a.   There shall be in the department small business advocates
dedicated to helping business owners obtain appropriate services from the
department and other city, state and federal agencies. The duties of such
dedicated small business advocates shall include, but need not be limited to:



      1.   receiving requests for assistance from small businesses
with respect to their interactions with the city, including, but not limited
to, agency inspections, rules, adjudications of violations, technical
assistance programs, workforce development programs, language access, and
customer service;



      2.   taking appropriate action to resolve requests for
assistance, including referring such requests to appropriate city, state and
federal agencies; and



      3.   identifying opportunities for policy and program
development to assist the small business sector and improve interactions
between small businesses and city agencies.



   b.   The department shall conduct outreach and education targeted to
small business owners and the general public related to the duties of such
dedicated small business advocates and their role as a central point of
contact for businesses seeking assistance from city agencies. Information
indicating how to contact the small business advocates established pursuant
to subdivision a of this section shall be prominently posted on the websites
of relevant agencies. For purposes of this subdivision, relevant agencies
shall include the department of buildings, the department of consumer
affairs, the department of health and mental hygiene, the department of
environmental protection, the department of sanitation, the bureau of fire
prevention of the fire department and the department of small business
services.



   c.   The department shall provide an initial written report to the
council not later than April1, 2017, and a second report not later than
April1, 2018, each documenting requests for assistance received by the small
businesses advocates in the immediately preceding calendar year. Each report
shall include, but need not be limited to: (i) the total number of requests
for assistance received by the small business advocates during the reporting
period; (ii) a general description of the type of each such request; and
(iii) a general description of the actions taken by the small business
advocates, if any, in response to each such request.



(L.L. 2015/066, 6/29/2015, eff. 9/27/2015)



Section 1308. Youth workforce development.



   a.   For the purposes of this section:



      Disconnected youth. The term “disconnected youth” means youth
between the ages of 18 and 24 years, who are neither attending school nor
employed.



   b.   The department shall administer a workforce development program
for disconnected youth. The commissioner shall administer the provisions of
this section to develop programs in consultation with the department of youth
and community development to:



      1.   Identify obstacles impacting disconnected youth who seek
the department’s youth workforce development services, including but not
limited to, issues related to transportation, child care, housing, health
care and substance abuse, criminal justice, and language and cultural
barriers;



      2.   Ensure that disconnected youth are connected with city
agencies or community based organizations that will enable them to address
those obstacles;



      3.   Develop and implement or connect disconnected youth with
education programs that will encourage disconnected youth to explore
opportunities to pursue a college degree or a technical or vocational career
education;



      4.   Develop and implement a job training program, based on
career progression, that offers sector based training for high growth
industries including, but not limited to, construction, transportation,
technology, industrial/manufacturing, and health care;



      5.   Connect disconnected youth with financial literacy
education resources offered through the city’s agencies and community based
organizations;



      6.   Provide entrepreneurial skills training;



      7.   Connect disconnected youth with on-going follow-up
services, such as adult mentoring, work-related peer support groups,
additional education or career pathway development training, for at least 12
months after they complete the job training program and/or are connected to
employment opportunities;



      8.   Provide information regarding the complete array of
services offered by the department; and



      9.   Make available labor market and employment information
about New York city’s high demand industry sectors or occupations obtained
from state or federal government agencies, as appropriate.



   c.   The department, with the assistance of the department of youth
and community development, shall coordinate with the appropriate agencies,
including but not limited to, the human resources administration, the
department of education, the mayor’s office, and community based
organizations, to implement the provisions of this section.



(L.L. 2017/113, 7/22/2017)



Chapter 57: Department of Environmental Protection



Section 1401. Department; commissioner.



   There shall be a department of environmental protection, the head of
which shall be the commissioner of environmental protection.



Section 1402. Deputies.



   The commissioner may appoint three deputies.



Section 1403. Powers and duties of the commissioner.



   Except as otherwise provided by law, the commissioner shall have charge
and control of and be responsible for all those functions and operations of
the city relating to the provision of a pure, wholesome and adequate supply
of water, the disposal of sewage and the prevention of air, water and noise
pollution, and shall be authorized to respond to emergencies caused by
releases or threatened releases of hazardous substances and to collect and
manage information concerning the amount, location and nature of hazardous
substances. The powers and duties of the commissioner shall include, without
limitation, the following:



      a.   Water resources control.



         (1)   The commissioner shall have charge and control of:



            (a)   All structures and property connected with
the supply and distribution of water for public use not owned by private
corporations, including all fire and drinking hydrants and all water meters;



            (b)   Furnishing the water supply and maintaining
its quality, and of the investigation for and the construction of all works
necessary to deliver the proper and required quality of water with ample
reserve for contingencies and future demands; and



            (c)   Making and enforcing rules and regulations
governing and restricting the use and supply of water;



         (2)   The commissioner shall examine into the sources of
water supply of any private companies supplying the city or any portion
thereof or its inhabitants with water to see that the same is wholesome and
the supply is adequate, to establish such rules and regulations in respect
thereof as are reasonable and necessary for the convenience of the public and
to exercise superintendence, regulation and control in respect to the supply
of water by such water companies.



      b.   Sewage control.



         (1)   The commissioner shall have charge and control
over the location, construction, alteration, repair, maintenance and
operation of all sewers including intercepting sewers and sewage disposal
plants, and of all matters in the several boroughs relating to public sewers
and drainage, and shall initiate and make all plans for drainage and shall
have charge of all public and private sewers in accordance with such plans;
and shall have charge of the management, care and maintenance of sewer and
drainage systems therein. In addition, the commissioner shall have the
authority to supervise and adopt rules regarding private sewage disposal
systems, other than community private sewage disposal systems, and to
prescribe civil penalties for the violation of such rules of no more than ten
thousand dollars per violation, and, except as otherwise provided in section
six hundred forty-three of this charter, to issue permits pursuant to such
rules for the construction and maintenance of such private sewage disposal
systems. With regard to community private sewage disposal systems, the
commissioner shall have the authority to perform inspections, and to issue
notices of violation for violations of any provision of the New York city
health code relating to private sewage disposal, which shall be served and
returnable as provided by law for violations of the New York city health
code, and the power to perform such other duties with regard to the
supervision and regulation of such systems as may be lawfully delegated to
him or her by the board of health or department of health and mental hygiene.



         (2)   The commissioner may adopt regulations requiring
the discharge of sewage, refuse, factory waste and trade waste into the
public sewers of the city, or regulating, restricting or prohibiting the use
of public sewers for the discharge therein of any material or substance and
may prescribe civil penalties for the violation thereof.



         (3)   Nothing in this subdivision shall be construed to
limit the authority or powers of the commissioner of health and mental
hygiene, the department of health and mental hygiene, or the board of health
relating to the declaration or abatement of nuisances, or the enforcement of
applicable public health laws or rules.



      b-1.   Water pollution control.



         (1)   Except as otherwise provided by law and subject to
the provisions of this chapter, the commissioner shall have the power to
administer and enforce provisions of law, rules and regulations relating to
the management and control of discharges and runoff from public and private
property, including but not limited to stormwater discharges; regulate and
control discharges into water within and about the city of New York of
harmful or objectionable substances, contaminants and pollutants that may
have an adverse impact on waters of the state; enforce all laws, rules and
regulations with respect to discharges described in this paragraph; make such
investigations and studies as may be desirable for the purpose of such
enforcement and of controlling and eliminating pollution of waters within and
about the city of New York; and, for the purposes set forth in this
paragraph, compel the attendance of witnesses and take such witnesses’
testimony under oath.



         (2)   The commissioner shall have the power to
coordinate the actions of city agencies with respect to compliance with the
state pollutant discharge elimination system (SPDES) permit for municipal
separate storm sewer systems of New York city, SPDES No. NY-0287890 or its
successor.



         (3)   City agencies shall have the power to take such
actions, including but not limited to the promulgation of rules, as they
determine to be necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of the
state pollutant discharge elimination system (SPDES) permit for municipal
separate storm sewer systems of New York city, SPDES No. NY-0287890 or its
successor, and with provisions of law related thereto.



      c.   Air resources control. The commissioner shall regulate
and control the emission into the open air of harmful or objectionable
substances, including, but not limited to, smoke, soot, dust, fumes, flyash,
gas vapors, odors and any products of combustion or incomplete combustion
resulting from the use of fuel burning equipment or from the heating of fuels
or refuse. The commissioner shall enforce all laws, rules and regulations
with respect to such emissions and shall make such investigations and studies
as may be desirable for the purpose of such enforcement and of controlling
and eliminating air pollution, and for such purpose shall have the power to
compel the attendance of witnesses and to take their testimony under oath.



      d.   Noise pollution control. The commissioner shall enforce
all laws, rules and regulations to eliminate noise pollution. The
commissioner shall make investigations and studies to develop permissible
sound levels and to correct problems related to noise control, and, for such
purposes, shall have power to compel the attendance of witnesses and to take
their testimony under oath.



      e.   Review of environmental consequences of certain
activities. The commissioner shall review and comment upon the environmental
consequences of any activity requiring the approval of any agency of the city
where such activity may have a significant impact on the physical aspects of
the environment of the city, and shall be responsible for investigating,
evaluating and reporting upon activities related to fuel supply and demand,
alternative sources of energy, and resource recovery.



      f.   Resource recovery task force.



         (1)   There shall be a resource recovery task force,
which shall consist of no more than twelve employees, as well as such
clerical and secretarial staff as may be necessary, all of whom shall be
assigned by the commissioners of the department of environmental protection
and the department of sanitation. The commissioners shall jointly appoint an
executive director who shall report directly to both commissioners.



         (2)   The task force shall advise and make
recommendations to both commissioners with respect to planning and
implementation of programs of energy and materials recovery for the city's
solid and liquid wastes.



         (3)   The approval of both commissioners shall be
required prior to the adoption of any plan, action or regulation recommended
by the task force except as to environmental impact determinations which
shall be the sole responsibility of the commissioner of environmental
protection.



      g.   Energy conservation and alternative fuels. The
commissioner shall participate in formulating an energy policy for the city,
including assessing the environmental costs and factors associated with all
kinds of energy use and programs developed to meet energy needs. The
commissioner shall study, establish, organize, promote, coordinate and carry
out policies, activities, projects and programs designed to encourage fuel
and energy conservation, alternate sources of fuel and energy and encourage,
stimulate and and foster others to participate in such projects, programs and
activities.



      h.   Emergency response. The commissioner shall have the power
to respond to emergencies caused by releases or threatened releases of
hazardous substances into the environment. The commissioner may (1) implement
any response measures deemed to be necessary to protect the public health or
welfare or the environment from a release or threat of release, (2) order
responsible persons to undertake response measures, and (3) recover the costs
of response measures incurred by the department from the responsible persons.



      i.   Community right-to-know. The commissioner shall have the
power to collect, compile and manage information concerning the amount,
location and nature of hazardous substances present in the city. This
information shall be made available to city personnel responsible for
responding to emergencies involving hazardous substances and the public.



(Am. L.L. 2017/097, 5/30/2017, eff. 6/29/2017)



Section 1404. Office of environmental remediation.



   There shall be an office of environmental remediation within the
department. The office shall be headed by the director of the office of
environmental remediation in accordance with subdivision e of section fifteen
of the New York city charter. The office shall exercise such powers and
duties as the director shall determine, including, but not limited to, the
power and duty to administer the E-Designation program, as defined in section
11-15 of the zoning resolution of the city of New York.



Editor's note: Former Section 1404, environmental control board, renumbered
as Section 1049-a.



Chapter 58: Department of Finance



Section 1501. Department; commissioner.



   There shall be a department of finance, the head of which shall be the
commissioner of finance.



Section 1502. Deputies.



   The mayor may appoint three deputy commissioners. In addition, the
mayor shall appoint one deputy commissioner whose function shall be to serve
as the city sheriff. The commissioner and deputy commissioners shall provide
a bond. The first deputy commissioner shall supervise and be responsible for
the operations of the parking violations bureau.



Section 1503. Powers and duties of the commissioner.



   In the performance of his or her functions, the commissioner shall
have, in addition to such others as may be conferred upon such commissioner
from time to time by law, the power and duty to prepare and disburse payroll
checks upon a master warrant prepared by the comptroller as prescribed in the
administrative code.



Section 1504. Functions of the department.



   Except as otherwise provided by law, the department shall perform those
functions and operations of the city which relate to the administration and
collection of all taxes, assessments and charges imposed by the city, the
collection of arrears due the city and all other sums due the city, including
state and federal aid, the receipt and safekeeping of all moneys paid into
the city treasury and payment of money out of the treasury, and the
administration and management of certain trust funds held by the city,
including, without limitation, the following:



      1.   Real property assessment. With respect to real property
tax assessment, the department shall assess for taxation all the taxable real
property in the city and prepare the assessment rolls. The commissioner shall
appoint, within the appropriation therefor, as many assessors as shall be
necessary for the performance of such functions in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.



      2.   Tax collection.



         a.   The department shall administer all excise and
non-property taxes imposed or administered by the city. With respect to such
taxes, the department shall have the power to settle and adjust all claims in
favor of or against the city and, except with respect to cases within the
jurisdiction of the tax appeals tribunal established by section one hundred
sixty-eight of this charter, to make determinations in contested cases. For
such purposes, the commissioner or his delegate may, except with respect to
cases within the jurisdiction of such tax appeals tribunal, hold hearings and
administer oaths.



         b.   The department shall collect all real property
taxes, water and sewer charges, other assessments and arrears against real
property and all other taxes, assessments and arrears payable to the city.



         c.   Notwithstanding the provisions of any general,
special or local law to the contrary, the commissioner shall have the
exclusive authority to compromise any excise or nonproperty taxes or annual
vault charges or any warrant or judgment for excise or nonproperty taxes or
annual vault charges administered by the commissioner, and the civil
penalties, interest and additions to tax or charge in connection therewith,
if the tax debtor has been discharged in bankruptcy, or is shown by proofs
submitted to be insolvent, but the amount payable in compromise shall in no
event be less than the amount, if any, recoverable through legal proceedings,
and provided that where the amount owing for excise or nonproperty taxes or
annual vault charges, exclusive of any civil penalties, interest and
additions to tax or charge, or the warrant or judgment, exclusive of any
civil penalties, interest and additions to tax or charge, is more than one
hundred thousand dollars, such compromise shall be effective only when
approved by a justice of the supreme court.



         d.   Notwithstanding the provisions of any general,
special or local law to the contrary, the commissioner shall have the
exclusive authority to compromise civil liability, with such qualifications
and limitations as may be established pursuant to such rules as the
commissioner may prescribe, where such liability arises in connection with an
excise or nonproperty tax or annual vault charge administered by the
commissioner, at any time prior to the time the tax or administrative action
becomes finally and irrevocably fixed and no longer subject to administrative
review. Upon acceptance of an offer in compromise by the commissioner, the
matter may not be reopened except upon a showing of fraud, malfeasance or
misrepresentation of a material fact. The corporation counsel may compromise
any such liability after reference to the law department for prosecution or
defense at any time prior to the time the tax or administrative action taken
by the department is no longer subject to administrative or judicial review.
Whenever a compromise is made by the department of any such liability, there
shall be placed on file in the office of the commissioner the opinion of the
commissioner or a deputy commissioner, with reasons therefor, with a
statement of: (i) the amount of excise or nonproperty tax or annual vault
charge and any other issues that may be the subject of such compromise, (ii)
the amount of interest, additions to the tax or penalty imposed by law on the
taxpayer or other persons against whom the administrative action was taken by
the department, and (iii) the amount actually paid in accordance with the
terms of the compromise. Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, no such
opinion shall be required with respect to the compromise of any civil
liability in which the unpaid amount of the excise or nonproperty tax or
annual vault charge that was the subject of the administrative action
(including any interest, additions to tax, or penalty) is less than
twenty-five thousand dollars.



         e.   Nothing in paragraph c or d of this subdivision
shall be construed to diminish or otherwise impair any power of the
department exercised pursuant to any other provision of law.



      3.   Deposit and payment of moneys in the city treasury; trust
funds.



         a.   The department shall have the power and duty to
provide for the reception and safekeeping of all moneys paid into the
treasury of the city and for the payment of all moneys on warrants drawn by
the comptroller and countersigned by the commissioner.



         b.   The department shall administer and manage all
trust funds received or held by the city pursuant to a judgment, decree or
order of any court or under section eleven hundred twenty-three of the
surrogate's court procedure act, section ninety-nine-m of the general
municipal law, sections eighty-seven and one hundred eleven-h of the social
services law, sections four hundred twenty-six and four hundred thirty-two of
the real property law, section two hundred four of the lien law and section
five hundred fifty-three of the county law, and in such administration it
shall be deemed to be acting in a fiduciary capacity. The department shall
provide for the receipt and safekeeping of all such moneys of the trust funds
held by the city and disburse the same on warrants signed by the comptroller.
The department may waive the fees to which the commissioner is entitled under
section ninety-nine-m of the general municipal law after consideration of the
budgetary impact on the city of such a waiver, the purpose of orders of bail
and the equitable administration of justice.



         c.   (i)   Notwithstanding any provision of law to
the contrary and unless otherwise determined by the court which directed
payment of the funds in the first instance, for purposes of administering and
managing the trust funds, other than cemetery trust funds, enumerated in
paragraph b of this subdivision, whenever the department is permitted or
required by law to deposit such funds in a savings bank, trust company, bank,
or banking association, or to invest such funds in its discretion or in legal
investments for trustees or savings banks, the department may combine all
such trust funds into one or more common trust funds, which may be deposited
in such savings banks, trust companies, banks or banking associations as are
designated by the state comptroller pursuant to section one hundred
eighty-two of the state finance law, or invested in legal investments for
trustees or savings banks. Such funds, when deposited in a savings bank,
trust company, bank or banking association, may be placed in demand or time
deposit accounts, including time certificates of deposit, and such deposits
shall be either insured by a federal deposit insurance corporation or full
collateralized by securities acceptable to the state comptroller.



            (ii)   The department may retain trust funds
temporarily pending investment or deposit or to meet cash requirements in
connection with the deposit or withdrawal of such funds, but such temporary
retention of trust funds shall not deprive any owner or beneficiary of any
income therefrom to which the owner or beneficiary would otherwise be
entitled by law.



            (iii)   When trust funds are received by the
department it shall forthwith open and maintain a separate ledger account for
each action, proceeding or matter and shall keep an exact accounting of all
such funds and all income earned thereon in such manner as the state
comptroller may prescribe.



      4.   Parking violations bureau. The department shall operate
and control the parking violations bureau. The commissioner shall appoint the
director of the bureau, deputy director and all other officers and employees
of the bureau, and hearing examiners.



(Am. L.L. 2016/179, 12/22/2016)



Section 1504-a. Tribunal for tax appeals. [Repealed]



 



Section 1505. Real property tax assessment.



   The department shall have those powers and duties with respect to the
assessment of real property for taxation as are prescribed by this chapter
and, in addition such other powers and duties as may be conferred upon it by
law. The department shall maintain in each borough an office for the
performance of such powers and duties.



Section 1506. Duties of the assessors.



   The assessors, under the direction of the commissioner, shall assess
all the real property in the several districts that may be assigned to them
by the commissioner and shall prepare the assessment rolls. The term
"assessment" shall mean a determination by the assessors of (a) the taxable
status of real property as of the taxable status date; and (b) the valuation
of real property, including the valuation of exempt real property, and where
such property is partially exempt, the valuation of both the taxable and
exempt portions.



Section 1507. Taxable status of property.



   The taxable status of all real property assessable for taxation in the
city shall be fixed for the succeeding fiscal year on the fifth day of
January in each year.



Section 1508. Assessment of real property.



   The assessors shall commence to assess real estate on the first day of
July in each year, not a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday.



Section 1509. Statement of assessed valuation.



   An assessor or other person designated by the commissioner shall
compute from the annual record of the assessed valuation of real estate in
each borough the total aggregate amount of the assessed valuation of real
property appearing on such annual record for such borough, and shall transmit
a statement of such aggregate amount to the commissioner on or before the
fifth day of January in each year.



Section 1510. Annual record of assessed valuation; public inspection.



   The books of the annual record of the assessed valuation of real estate
shall be opened to the public not later than the fifteenth day of January in
each year, not a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, and remain open during
the usual business hours for public inspection and examination until the
first day of March thereafter. The commissioner, previous to and during the
time such books are open to public inspection, shall advertise such fact in
the City Record and in such other newspaper or newspapers published in the
several boroughs as may be authorized by the director of the City Record with
the approval of the mayor and the comptroller.



Section 1511. Notice of increase in assessed valuation of real property.



   The department or division responsible for the assessment of real
property shall, upon an increase in assessed valuation of real property,
notify the owner, as recorded in said department or division, of such
increase by first-class mail at least thirty days prior to the final date for
filing any appeal. The department or division shall notify the commissioner
of the mailing of such notices by the filing of an affidavit of such mailing
in the main office of the department.



Section 1512. Annual record of assessed valuation, additions and changes.



   During the time the books of the annual record of the assessed
valuation of real estate remain open for public inspection and examination,
and, in the case of real estate other than residential real estate, during an
additional period ending the tenth day of May in each year, the commissioner
may place on such books any real estate and also the assessed valuation of
any such real estate that may have been omitted from such books on the day of
the opening thereof, and may increase or diminish the assessed valuation of
any real estate as in the commissioner's judgment may be just or necessary
for the equalization of taxation; but no such addition to the books and no
such increase in assessed valuation shall be made, except upon mailing ten
days' prior written notice addressed to the person whose name appears on the
records in the office of the city collector as being the owner or agent of
the owner of the real estate affected thereby at the last known address of
such owner or agent. Where no name appears on such records such notice shall
be sent to the premises addressed to either the owner or agent. An affidavit
of such mailing shall be filed in the main office of the department. When
such notice is mailed after the first day of February, such owners may apply
for a correction of such assessment so added or so increased within twenty
days after the mailing of such notice with the same force and effect as if
such application were made on or before the first day of March in such year.
For purposes of this section the term "residential real estate" shall include
but not be limited to one and two-family homes and multiple dwellings
(including co-operative and condominium dwelling units), but shall not
include hotels, apartment hotels and motels.



Section 1513. Apportionment of assessments.



   When any separately assessed parcel of real estate shall have been
divided prior to the first day of June, the commissioner may apportion the
assessment thereof in such manner as may be provided by law.



Section 1514. Assessment rolls; preparation and delivery.



   1.   Commencing immediately after the close of the period for public
inspection and examination of the books of annual record of the assessed
valuation of real estate, the commissioner shall cause to be prepared, from
such books, assessment rolls for each borough in such manner as shall be
provided by law.



   2.   As soon as such rolls are completed, the commissioner shall
annex to each of such rolls a certificate that the same is correct in
accordance with the entries and corrected entries in the several books of
annual record. The rolls so certified must, on or before the twentieth day of
June in each year, be delivered by the commissioner to the council.



Section 1515. Statement and estimate by the mayor.



   a.   The mayor shall prepare and submit to the council, immediately
upon the adoption of a single budget pursuant to section two hundred
fifty-four, a statement setting forth the amount of the budget as approved by
the council for the ensuing year and the mayor shall prepare and submit to
the council not later than the fifth day of June an estimate of the probable
amount of (1) receipts into the city treasury during the ensuing fiscal year
from all the sources of revenue of the general fund and (2) all receipts
other than those of the general fund and taxes on real property. The mayor
may include in the statement of the amount of the budget as approved by the
council a confirmation of such amount, and thereby waive mayoral veto power
pursuant to section two hundred fifty-five.



   b.   If, as a result of the exercise of the mayor's veto pursuant to
section two hundred fifty-five, the amount of the budget for the ensuing
fiscal year differs from the amount of the budget approved by the council
pursuant to section two hundred fifty-four, not later than two days after the
budget is finally adopted the mayor shall prepare and submit to the council a
statement setting forth the amount of the budget for the ensuing year, and
the council shall, if necessary, fix new annual tax rates pursuant to
subdivision c of section one thousand five hundred sixteen.



   c.   The mayor, prior to establishing the final estimate of revenues
for the ensuing fiscal year as required by this section, shall consider any
alternative estimate of revenues which is submitted pursuant to subdivision d
of this section and which is accompanied by a statement of the methodologies
and assumptions upon which such estimate is based in such detail as is
necessary to facilitate official and public understanding of such estimates.



   d.   Any person or organization may, prior to the fifteenth day of
May, submit to the mayor an official alternative estimate of revenues for
consideration by the mayor in accordance with subdivision c. Such estimate
shall be in a form prescribed by the mayor.



Section 1516. Fixing of tax rates.



   a.   The council shall fix the annual tax rates immediately upon the
approval of the budget pursuant to section two hundred fifty-four. The
council shall deduct the total amount of receipts as estimated by the mayor
from the amount of the budget, for the ensuing fiscal year, and shall cause
to be raised by tax on real property such sum as shall be as nearly as
possible but not less than, the balance so arrived at, by fixing tax rates in
cents and thousandths of a cent upon each dollar of assessed valuation. The
tax rates shall be such to produce a balanced budget within generally
accepted accounting principles for municipalities.



   b.   If a single budget has not been adopted by the fifth day of
June pursuant to subdivision b of section two hundred fifty-four, the tax
rates adopted for the current fiscal year shall be deemed to have been
extended for the new fiscal year until such time as a new budget is adopted.



   c.   In the event the mayor exercises the veto power pursuant to
section two hundred fifty-five, the council shall, if necessary, fix new
annual rates not later than the date the budget is finally adopted in
accordance with the requirements of subdivision a of this section.



Section 1516-a. Fixing of tax rates.



   Notwithstanding the provisions of sections fifteen hundred sixteen,
fifteen hundred seventeen and fifteen hundred eighteen or any other
provisions of law to the contrary:



      (a)   If the city council has not fixed the tax rates for the
ensuing fiscal year pursuant to section fifteen hundred sixteen on or before
the fifth day of June, the commissioner of finance shall be authorized to
complete the assessment rolls using estimated rates and to collect the sums
therein mentioned according to law. The estimated rates shall equal the tax
rates for the current fiscal year.



      (b)   If, subsequent to the fifth day of June, the council
shall, pursuant to section fifteen hundred sixteen, fix the tax rates for the
ensuing fiscal year at percentages differing from the estimated rates, real
estate tax payment shall nevertheless be payable in accordance with
subdivision a of this section at the estimated rates. However, in such event,
prior to the first day of January in such fiscal year, the commissioner of
finance shall cause the completed assessment rolls to be revised to reflect
the tax rates fixed by the council pursuant to section fifteen hundred
sixteen, and an amended bill for the installment or installments for such
fiscal year due and payable on or after the first day of January shall be
submitted to each taxpayer in which whatever adjustment may be required as a
result of the estimated bill previously submitted to the taxpayer shall be
reflected.



Section 1517. Completion of assessment rolls.



   At such annual meeting the council shall cause to be set down in the
assessment rolls, opposite to the several sums set down in the valuation of
real property, the respective sums, in dollars and cents, to be paid as a tax
thereon, rejecting the fractions of a cent. It shall also cause to be added
and set down the aggregate valuations of the real property in the several
boroughs, and shall transmit to the comptroller of the state by mail a
certificate of such aggregate valuation in each borough.



Section 1518. Collection of the real property tax.



   1.   Immediately upon the completion of the assessment rolls, the
city clerk shall procure the proper warrants authorizing and requiring the
commissioner to collect the several sums therein mentioned according to law.
Such warrants need be signed only by the public advocate and counter-signed
by the city clerk. Immediately thereafter and on or before the thirtieth day
of June, the assessment rolls of each borough, as corrected according to law
and finally completed, or a fair copy thereof, shall be delivered by the
public advocate to the commissioner with the proper warrants, so signed and
counter-signed, annexed thereto. At the same time the public advocate shall
notify the comptroller of the amount of taxes in each book of the assessment
rolls so delivered.



   2.   The commissioner upon receiving the assessment rolls and
warrants shall immediately cause the assessment rolls and warrants to be
filed in the respective borough offices.



Section 1519. Real property taxes due and payable.



   The commissioner, immediately after receiving the assessment rolls,
shall give notice for at least five days in the City Record that the
assessment rolls have been delivered to the commissioner and that all taxes
shall be due and payable at the commissioner's offices as follows:



      1.   a.   With respect to all properties which are:



            (1)   real property with an assessed valuation of
forty thousand dollars or less on such assessment roll, except such property
held in a cooperative form of ownership;



            (2)   real property held in a cooperative form of
ownership, provided that the assessed valuation on such assessment roll of
such property divided by the number of dwelling units contained in such
property shall equal forty thousand dollars or less;



            (3)   for the fiscal year commencing on the first
day of July, nineteen hundred ninety-eight, and for each fiscal year
thereafter, real property (i) with an assessed valuation of eighty thousand
dollars or less on such assessment roll, except such property held in a
cooperative form of ownership, and (ii) classified as class one or class two
in accordance with subdivision one of section eighteen hundred two of the
real property tax law as such subdivision was in effect on January fifth,
nineteen hundred ninety-seven; and



            (4)   for the fiscal year commencing on the first
day of July, nineteen hundred ninety-eight, and for each fiscal year
thereafter, real property held in a cooperative form of ownership, provided
that (i) the assessed valuation on such assessment roll of such property
divided by the number of dwelling units contained in such property shall
equal eighty thousand dollars or less, and (ii) such property is classified
as class one or class two in accordance with subdivision one of section
eighteen hundred two of the real property tax law as such subdivision was in
effect on January fifth, nineteen hundred ninety-seven; all taxes upon real
estate for each fiscal year shall be due and payable in four equal
installments each of which shall be due and payable in such year as follows:
the first payment on the first day of July, the second payment on the first
day of October, the third payment on the first day of January, the fourth
payment on the first day of April. However, if any property is acquired by
the city in condemnation proceedings, the proportionate share of the amount
of the tax on such property which would be due and payable on the next
succeeding installment date, shall be due and payable on the date when the
title to such property vests in the city.



         b.   With respect to real property other than such
property listed in paragraph a of this subdivision one, for the fiscal year
commencing on the first day of July nineteen hundred eighty-three and for
each fiscal year thereafter: all taxes upon real estate for each fiscal year
shall be due and payable in two equal installments, the first of which shall
be due and payable on the first day of July in such year, and the second of
which shall be due and payable on the first day of January in such year.
However, if any property is acquired by the city in condemnation proceedings,
the proportionate share of the amount of the tax on such property which would
be due and payable on the next succeeding installment date, shall be due and
payable on the date when the title to such property vests in the city.



      2.   All taxes shall be and become liens on the real estate
affected thereby and shall be construed as and deemed to be charged thereon
on the respective days when they become due and payable, and not earlier, and
shall remain such liens until paid.



      3.   Any installment of taxes on real estate for any fiscal
year may be paid, in full or in part, twenty-five days prior to the date on
which the first installment for such fiscal year would otherwise become due
and payable or at any time thereafter and, provided that payment of any
installment or part thereof is made not later than fifteen days prior to the
date that such installment would otherwise become due and payable and
provided that all prior installments shall have been paid or shall be paid at
the same time, a discount shall be allowed from the date of payment of such
installment or part thereof to and including the fifteenth day of the
calendar month on which such installment would otherwise become due and
payable at the rate fixed by the council and a receipt shall be furnished to
the extent of such payment and the discount thereon. Upon payment of any such
installment or part thereof prior to the date such installment would
otherwise become due and payable, such installment or part thereof shall be
deemed due and payable and shall be satisfied and extinguished to the extent
of the amount so paid plus the discount provided for herein. Not later than
the fifteenth day of May in each year, the banking commission shall transmit
a written recommendation to the council of the proposed discount rate for the
ensuing fiscal year. The council may adopt a discount rate for such ensuing
fiscal year on the fifth day of June preceding such ensuing fiscal year or at
any time thereafter. As used in this subdivision, the words "taxes on real
estate," in the case of utility companies, shall also include special
franchise taxes.



      4.   a.   (1)   Notwithstanding anything in subdivision
three to the contrary, the discount allowed pursuant to such subdivision
shall not be allowed to and including the fifteenth day of the calendar month
in which an installment of taxes on real property would otherwise become due
and payable if the real property with respect to which such installment is
paid is described in paragraph b of this subdivision. With respect to real
property described in paragraph b, the discount shall be allowed only to and
including the date on which an installment of taxes becomes due and payable.



            (2)   Notwithstanding anything in subdivision
three to the contrary, no discount shall be allowed with respect to an
installment of taxes on real property described in paragraph b of this
subdivision unless such installment is paid no later than thirty days prior
to the date on which such installment becomes due and payable.



         b.   Real property is described in this paragraph if:



            (1)   its assessed valuation is more than forty
thousand dollars, provided that, for this purpose, real property held in a
cooperative form of ownership shall not be deemed to have an assessed
valuation of more than forty thousand dollars if its assessed valuation
divided by the number of dwelling units contained therein equals forty
thousand dollars or less, except that for the fiscal year commencing on the
first day of July, nineteen hundred ninety-eight, and for each fiscal year
thereafter, such property shall not include real property with an assessed
valuation of eighty thousand dollars or less, provided that, for this
purpose, real property held in a cooperative form of ownership shall not be
deemed to have an assessed valuation of more than eighty thousand dollars if
its assessed valuation divided by the number of dwelling units contained
therein equals eighty thousand dollars or less, and provided, further, that
such real property or such real property held in a cooperative form of
ownership is classified as class one or class two in accordance with
subdivision one of section eighteen hundred two of the real property tax law
as such subdivision was in effect on January fifth, nineteen hundred
ninety-seven; or



            (2)   irrespective of its assessed valuation, real
property taxes on such property are held in escrow and paid to the
commissioner by a mortgage escrow agent.



         c.   For purposes of this subdivision, the term
"mortgage escrow agent" shall include every banking organization, federal
savings bank, federal savings and loan association, federal credit union,
bank, trust company, licensed mortgage banker, savings bank, savings and loan
association, credit union, insurance corporation organized under the laws of
any state other than New York, or any other person, entity or organization
which, in the regular course of its business, requires, maintains or services
escrow accounts in connection with mortgages on real property located in the
city.



      5.   The provisions of this section shall not apply to any
installment of tax that becomes due and payable on or after July first, two
thousand five.



Section 1519-a. Real property taxes due and payable.



   The commissioner, immediately after receiving the assessment rolls,
shall give notice for at least five days in the City Record that the
assessment rolls are final and that all taxes shall be due and payable as
follows:



      1.   The provisions of this section shall apply to any
installment of tax that becomes due and payable on or after July first, two
thousand five.



      2.   Real property with an assessed value of two hundred fifty
thousand dollars or less.



         (a)   Quarterly installments. All property taxes shall
be due in four equal installments.



         (b)   Due date of installments. The first installment
shall be due on July first, the second installment shall be due on October
first, the third installment shall be due on January first and the fourth
installment shall be due on April first.



         (c)   Discount for early payment. A discount, at a
percentage provided for in subdivision seven of this section, shall be
allowed for early payment of an installment in accordance with this
subdivision, as follows:



            (i)   if all the installments due for a fiscal
year are paid in full on or before July fifteenth, a discount shall be
allowed for such installments.



            (ii)   if the installments due on October first,
January first and April first are paid in full on or before October
fifteenth, a discount shall be allowed for such installments.



            (iii)   if the installments due on January first
and April first are paid in full on or before January fifteenth, a discount
shall be allowed for such installments.



      3.   Real property with an assessed value of over two hundred
fifty thousand dollars.



         (a)   Semi-annual installments. All property taxes shall
be due in two equal installments.



         (b)   Due date of installments. The first installment
shall be due on July first and the second installment shall be due on January
first.



         (c)   Discount for early payment. A discount, at a
percentage provided for in subdivision seven of this section, shall be
allowed for early payment of installments if all the installments due for a
fiscal year are paid in full on or before July first.



      4.   Cooperative property. For purposes of this section,
property held in the cooperative form of ownership shall not be deemed to
have an assessed value of over two hundred fifty thousand dollars if the
property's assessed value divided by the number of residential dwelling units
is two hundred fifty thousand dollars or less per unit.



      5.   For purposes of this section, a property's assessed value
shall be based on the assessed value listed on the final assessment roll on
or around May twenty-fifth.



      6.   All taxes shall be and become liens on the property on
the date such taxes become due and payable, and shall remain liens until paid.



      7.   Calculation of discount for early payment.



         (a)   Calculation of discount. Where a discount is
allowed under this section, the discount shall be a percentage of the
installments paid.



         (b)   Determination of discount percentage. Not later
than the thirteenth day of May in each year, the banking commission shall
send a written recommendation to the council of a proposed discount
percentage for the ensuing fiscal year. Such recommendation shall include a
report detailing the research and analytical methods used by the commission
to provide the recommendation on the discount percentage; factors considered
when determining the recommendation, including whether the city's current
cash balance was a factor; and the rationale for the use of such factors. The
information contained in the report required by this paragraph shall be in a
searchable and machine-readable format, sortable by council district, real
property tax class, and real property tax sub class. Such report shall
include the following information for the two previous fiscal years unless
otherwise specified, provided that such information shall be reported for
fiscal years prior to the 2016 fiscal year only to the extent such
information is available, and provided further that the information required
in subparagraphs (vi) through (x) of this paragraph shall be reported using
discount percentages in the amount of one-half of one percent, one percent,
one and one-half percent, two percent, and the six-month London Inter Bank
Offered Rate (LIBOR) for United States dollars in effect on the thirtieth day
of April as published by the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis in the Federal
Reserve Economic Data (FRED) database:



            (i)   the total number of properties for which the
taxes were paid in semi-annual installments, disaggregated by fiscal year,
and the estimated total number of properties for which the taxes were paid in
semi-annual installments in the current fiscal year;



            (ii)   the total number of properties for which
the taxes were paid in quarterly installments, disaggregated by fiscal year,
and the estimated total number of properties for which the taxes were paid in
quarterly installments in the current fiscal year;



            (iii)   the total amount of real property taxes
paid for the properties described in subparagraphs (i) and (ii) of this
paragraph, disaggregated by fiscal year, and the estimated amount of real
property taxes paid for such properties in the current fiscal year;



            (iv)   the total amount of real property taxes due
for the properties described in subparagraphs (i) and (ii) of this paragraph
for which a discount for early payment pursuant to paragraph (c) of
subdivision two or three of this section was applied, before the application
of any such discount;



            (v)   the total amount of real property taxes due
for the properties described in subparagraphs (i) and (ii) of this paragraph
for which a discount for early payment pursuant to paragraph (c) of
subdivision two or three of this section was applied, after the application
of any such discount;



            (vi)   the average amount of real property taxes
paid for the properties described in subparagraph (v) of this paragraph;



            (vii)   the average amount of the discount
provided for the properties described in subparagraph (v) of this paragraph;



            (viii)   the difference between subparagraphs (iv)
and (v) of this paragraph, disaggregated by fiscal year, including such
estimated difference for the current fiscal year;



            (ix)   the interest income not earned on unpaid
taxes due for the properties described in subparagraph (v) of this paragraph,
and the estimated interest income not earned on unpaid taxes due for such
properties in the current fiscal year;



            (x)   any other information deemed relevant by the
commission; and



            (xi)   the discount percentage provided for the
early payment of real property taxes in comparable cities for the two
previous fiscal years.



         (c)   Not earlier than the fourteenth day of May, the
council may adopt by resolution a discount percentage. In the event the
council adopts a discount percentage different than the proposed discount
percentage recommended by the banking commission pursuant to paragraph (b) of
this subdivision, such resolution shall contain the research and analytical
methods used by the council when determining the discount percentage; factors
considered when determining the discount percentage, including the city's
current cash balance; and the rationale for the use of such factors.



         (d)   If the council does not adopt a discount
percentage prior to the date that the statement of account or other similar
bill or statement is prepared, the discount percentage shall be the
annualized interest rate on six-month United States treasury bills, as
reported by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in its H.15
report or similar statistical report detailing selected interest rates, plus
seventy-five basis points, the sum of which shall be divided by four for the
last business day of April preceding the ensuing fiscal year where a discount
is allowed for payments made on or before the last day that the installment
due July first could be paid without interest, and this percentage shall
continue to apply until the council adopts a discount percentage pursuant to
paragraph (c) of this subdivision.



         (e)   Application of discount percentages.



            (i)   For properties the taxes for which are due
in quarterly or semi-annual installments, the discount percentage applied for
payments made on or before the last day that the installment due July first
could be paid without interest, as set forth in subparagraph (i) of paragraph
(c) of subdivision two of this section or paragraph (c) of subdivision three
of this section, shall be the percentage established pursuant to paragraph
(c) of this subdivision or, where applicable, paragraph (d) of this
subdivision.



            (ii)   For properties the taxes for which are due
in quarterly installments, the discount percentage applied for payments made
on or before October fifteenth, as set forth in subparagraph (ii) of
paragraph (c) of subdivision two of this section, shall be two-thirds of the
discount percentage described in subparagraph (i) of this paragraph.



            (iii)   For properties the taxes for which are due
in quarterly installments, the discount percentage applied for payments made
on or before January fifteenth, as set forth in subparagraph (iii) of
paragraph (c) of subdivision two of this section, shall be one-third of the
discount percentage described in subparagraph (i) of this paragraph.



         (f)   A discount shall be allowed only if all prior
installments have been paid or are paid at the same time as the payments for
which a discount would apply.



         (g)   (i)   The commissioner may provide a discount,
at a percentage not more than two times the discount percentage established
pursuant to paragraph (c) or (d) of this subdivision, to taxpayers who pay
their real property taxes by electronic funds transfer. This subparagraph
shall apply only to taxpayers who are not required by law to pay their real
property taxes by electronic funds transfer. The commissioner shall establish
such discount percentage by rule and may promulgate such other rules as may
be necessary to implement this subpara- graph.



            (ii)   The commissioner may provide a discount, at
a percentage not more than two times the discount percentage established
pursuant to paragraph (c) or (d) of this subdivision, to taxpayers whose
annual real property tax liability exceeds one million dollars and who pay
their real property taxes before the date such taxes become due and payable,
where the commissioner determines by rule that it would be in the best
interests of the city to provide an incentive for such payment by a specified
date and at a specified discount percentage. The commissioner may promulgate
such other rules as may be necessary to implement this subparagraph.



      8.   As used in this section, "taxes" shall include special
franchise taxes in the case of utility companies.



      9.   If property is acquired by the city in a condemnation
proceeding, on the date that title vests in the city, any tax due prior to
the title vesting date, and interest, shall be due and payable, and shall
become an equitable lien with first priority against any condemnation award.



      10.   When property tax bills for the quarterly or semi-annual
installments of tax due in accordance with this section are available online,
the commissioner shall notify by electronic mail owners of real property who
have registered an electronic mail address online with the commissioner to
receive department of finance property information updates that such bills
are available online.



(Am. L.L. 2017/004, 1/27/2017)



Section 1520. Interest and penalties on real property taxes.



   The commissioner shall charge, receive and collect the interest and
penalties upon taxes on real estate not paid when due and payable in such
manner and at such rates as shall be provided by law, provided, however,
where such taxes are not escrowed, and where such interest does not exceed
five dollars, it shall be forgiven.



Section 1521. Right of entry.



   The commissioner or any assessor may, in accordance with law, enter
upon real property and into buildings and structures at all reasonable times
to ascertain the character of the property. Refusal by the owner or the agent
of such owner to permit such entry shall be a misdemeanor triable by a judge
of the criminal court of the city of New York and punishable by not more than
thirty days' imprisonment or a fine of not more than fifty dollars, or both.



Section 1522. Warrants.



   No money shall be paid out of the treasury except on a warrant
authorized by law, signed by the comptroller and countersigned by the
commissioner of finance which shall refer to the law under and to the
appropriation against which it is drawn. No warrant shall be paid on account
of any appropriation after the amount authorized to be raised for the purpose
specified in the appropriation shall have been expended. In counter-signing
warrants drawn by the comptroller, the commissioner shall be under no duty of
inquiring as to the legality or propriety thereof but may rely on the
comptroller's signature thereto.



Section 1523. Deposits.



   1.   The commissioner shall deposit all moneys which shall come into
the commissioner's hands on account of the city on the day of receipt
thereof, or on the business day next succeeding, in such banks and trust
companies as shall have been designated as deposit banks, but no amount shall
be on deposit at any one time in any one bank or trust company exceeding
one-half of the amount of the capital and net surplus of such bank or trust
company. The moneys so deposited shall be placed to the account of the
commissioner who shall keep a record in which shall be entered the
commissioner's accounts of deposits in, and moneys drawn from, the banks and
trust companies in which the deposits shall be made. Each such bank and trust
company shall transmit to the comptroller a weekly statement of the moneys
which shall be received and paid by it on account of the commissioner.



   2.   The commissioner shall draw moneys of the city from said banks
or trust companies only by checks subjoined and attached to warrants and
subscribed by the commissioner or by payment orders duly authorized by the
comptroller and the commissioner, and no moneys shall be paid by any such
banks or trust companies on account of the commissioner except upon such
checks or orders; but this provision shall not apply to transfers of such
funds from one city depository to another.



   3.   The commissioner of finance, in consultation with agency heads,
shall by rule establish criteria by which to evaluate whether banks are using
the means at their disposal to comply with the embargo on trade and financial
transactions with Burma and any other sanctions imposed by the United States
government with regard to Burma, including but not limited to:



      a.   withdrawal of operations from Burma;



      b.   the denial of loans, letters of credit and other
correspondent banking services to Burmese entities;



      c.   restrictions on the rescheduling of loans owed by Burmese
entities, and on conversion of outstanding loans to instruments having longer
maturity dates; and



      d.   divestiture of outstanding debt owed by Burmese entities.



   The commissioner shall, after offering banks designated pursuant to
section fifteen hundred twenty-four and the public an opportunity to be
heard, classify such banks according to such criteria and publish notice of
such classification in the City Record. The commissioner may at any time,
upon the request of a bank or at his or her own initiative and after offering
the public and the bank an opportunity to be heard, change the classification
of a bank and publish notice of such change. The failure of a bank to provide
information requested by the commissioner for the purposes of this
subdivision shall be grounds for the commissioner to lower the classification
of the bank. When choosing among banks offering comparable services at a
comparable cost, city agencies shall, in a manner consistent with guidelines
established by the commissioner of finance, seek to deposit or invest funds
at, and obtain services from, the available banks that have received the
highest classification.



Section 1524. Deposit banks.



   1.   The banking commission which consists of the mayor, the
commissioner and the comptroller shall, by majority vote, by written notice
to the commissioner, designate the banks or trust companies in which all
moneys of the city shall be deposited, and may by like notice in writing from
time to time change the banks and trust companies thus designated. The
banking commission shall notify the council within thirty days of receiving
an application for designation or redesignation, and shall also notify the
council within thirty days of approving or denying such application and, if
designation or redesignation was denied, the basis for denial.



   2.   a.   No bank or trust company shall be designated pursuant
to this section unless:



         (1)   it shall agree to pay into the city treasury
interest or to provide the city with equivalent value on the daily balances
at a rate which the banking commission shall negotiate according to the
current rate of interest upon like balances deposited in banks and trust
companies in the city by private persons or corporations; and



         (2)   it shall file with the banking commission and city
clerk a certificate signed by the president or other duly authorized officer
of such bank setting forth that its board of directors has established and
will adhere to a policy of hiring and promotion of employees and officers
without regard to sex, race, color, religion, religious affiliation, national
origin, disability, age, marital status, or sexual orientation, which
certificate shall further set forth affirmatively the steps taken by the bank
or trust company to implement said policy.



         (3)   it does not provide the following services, either
directly or through a subsidiary or agent, to the Government of Burma; (a)
advertising or otherwise promoting the sale, outside of Burma, coins minted
in Burma. (b) underwriting securities of the Government of Burma, or (c)
making loans to the Government of Burma.



         (4)   it has certified that neither it nor any of its
affiliates is or will become a predatory lender or an affiliate thereof, as
such terms are defined in section 6-128 of the administrative code of the
city of New York.



      b.   If the banking commission by a majority vote shall decide
that a requirement or condition contained in paragraph a of this subdivision
has been violated after giving the bank or trust company an opportunity to be
heard, then upon thirty days' notice to the bank or trust company such
designation may be revoked. The banking commission shall post notice of such
revocation and the reason for such revocation on the department's website.



   3.   The commissioner may, with the approval of the comptroller,
make time deposits of city moneys, for a period not to exceed six months, in
any bank or trust company designated for deposit of city funds. Each such
bank or trust company shall before deposits are made, other than such as are
of a temporary character and specifically relate to the current business of
the city, execute and file with the commissioner a bond to the city in such
form and in such amount as may be prescribed and approved by the commissioner
and the comptroller for the safekeeping and prompt payment of city moneys on
demand with interest at the rate agreed upon and, as security for such funds,
shall deposit with the comptroller outstanding unmatured obligations of the
United States of America, or any obligation fully guaranteed or insured as to
interest and principal by the United States of America acting through an
agency, subdivision, department or division thereof, obligations of the state
of New York or obligations of the city of New York, the value of which at the
existing prices on the open market shall be equal to the estimated amount of
the proposed deposit, for which the comptroller shall deliver a certificate
of deposit containing the condition of such bond.



   4.   On the withdrawal of all or a part of the funds deposited in
any depository and a closing or depleting of the account thereof, or in the
event of the deposit actually made being less than the estimated amount of
such deposit, the commissioner and the comptroller shall certify to such
settlement or depletion of difference and direct the surrender of the whole
or a proportionate share of the securities so deposited to the owner or
owners thereof.



Section 1524-a. Community investment advisory board.



   1.   There is hereby established within the department an advisory
board known as the community investment advisory board, which shall perform
the following functions:



      a.   Conduct a needs assessment every two years, the first of
which shall be published on the department's website on or before March 1,
2014. In conducting such needs assessment the board shall (1) assess the
credit, financial and banking services needs throughout the City with a
particular emphasis on low and moderate income individuals and communities,
by means including but not limited to (i) convening at least one public
hearing in each borough of the city; (ii) accepting, reviewing and
considering public comments which describe the nature and extent of such
needs; and (iii) considering the data and information collected by the board
pursuant to subdivision 3 of this section; and (2) establish benchmarks, best
practices, and recommendations for meeting the needs identified in such needs
assessment, by, among other things, considering the data and information
collected by the board pursuant to subdivision 3 of this section; and



      b.   Issue an annual report in plain language, the first of
which shall be published on the department's website and transmitted to the
banking commission on or before March 1, 2015 and each March first
thereafter, which may be considered by the banking commission in reviewing a
bank's application for designation or redesignation as a deposit bank,
covering the preceding fiscal year, which (i) addresses how each bank that is
designated as a deposit bank pursuant to section 1524 of the charter is
meeting the needs identified pursuant to paragraph a of this subdivision and
subdivision 3 of this section, including an evaluation of how each bank
performed relative to the benchmarks and best practices applicable to such
bank as established by the board pursuant to the needs assessment required
pursuant to paragraph a of this subdivision, (ii) identifies areas of
improvement from past evaluations, where applicable, and areas where
improvement is necessary, taking into account the information collected by
the board pursuant to subdivision 3 of this section, (iii) specifically
identifies any deposit bank's failure to provide information requested in
writing by the board pursuant to subdivision 3 of this section that is
applicable to such deposit bank, (iv) summarizes written comments submitted
to the board pursuant to subdivision 4 of this section and the role played by
such comments; and (v) summarizes, in tabular format, the data collected by
the board pursuant to paragraphs a through g of subdivision 3 of this
section, and to the extent not deemed confidential or proprietary by the
bank, paragraph h, at the community district, borough, and citywide levels of
aggregation. For purposes of this section, "fiscal year"shall mean the period
from July first to June thirtieth.



   2.   The board shall consist of eight members who shall be: the
mayor or his or her designee, the comptroller or his or her designee, the
speaker of the council or his or her designee, the commissioner of the
department of housing preservation and development, the commissioner of the
department of finance, a member of a community-based organization whose
principal purpose is community and/or economic development, or consumer
protection who shall be designated by the speaker, a representative of an
organization or association that represents small business owners who shall
be designated by the speaker and a representative of the city banking
industry who shall be designated by the mayor. The mayor, comptroller,
speaker and commissioners shall serve for the duration of their tenure. The
three nongovernmental members shall serve four years from the date of their
appointment, or through the issuance of two needs assessments pursuant to
paragraph a of subdivision 1 of this section, whichever is longer, and be
eligible for reappointment; provided, however, that each member shall serve
until his or her qualified successor is appointed. Any vacancy occurring
other than by expiration of term shall be filled in the same manner as the
original position was filled for the unexpired portion of the term. Members
shall serve without compensation. The members of the board shall be appointed
within sixty days of the effective date of the local law that added this
section.



   3.   In performing its functions as set forth in subdivision 1 of
this section, the board shall seek to collect and consider information at the
census tract level, relating to the credit, financial and banking services
needs throughout the City and the extent to which such needs are being met,
including but not limited to, information, to the extent applicable,
regarding each deposit bank's efforts to:



      a.   address the key credit and financial services needs of
small businesses;



      b.   develop and offer financial services and products that
are most needed by low and moderate income individuals and communities
throughout the city and provide physical branches;



      c.   provide funding, including construction and permanent
loans and investments, for affordable housing and economic development
projects in low and moderate income communities;



      d.   In the case of properties acquired by foreclosure and
owned by the bank, reasonably address serious material and health and safety
deficiencies in the maintenance and condition of the property;



      e.   conduct consumer outreach, settlement conferences, and
similar actions relating to mortgage assistance and foreclosure prevention,
and provide information, at the community district level to the board,
relating to mortgage and foreclosure actions, including, but not limited to,
total number of loans serviced and/or owned by the bank, total number of
loans that are at least sixty days delinquent, total number of foreclosures
commenced, total number of foreclosures prevented through loan modification,
short sales, deeds in lieu of foreclosure or other mechanisms, total number
of loan modifications applications, total number of loan modifications made
and denied, and bank owned properties donated or sold at a discount;



      f.   partner in the community development efforts of the city;



      g.   positively impact on the city and its communities through
activities including, but not limited to, philanthropic work and charitable
giving; and



      h.   plan for and articulate how the bank will respond to the
credit, financial and banking services needs of the city identified by the
needs assessment pursuant to paragraph a of subdivision 1 of this section, as
applicable to the bank's type and size.



      In performing the needs assessment pursuant to paragraph a of
subdivision 1 of this section, the board shall also consider, to the extent
practicable, the information listed in paragraphs a through g of this
subdivision relating to the efforts of the city's banking industry as a whole.



   4.   In preparation for each annual report pursuant to paragraph b
of subdivision 1 of this section, the board shall publish all information
collected pursuant to paragraphs a through g of subdivision 3 of this
section, and to the extent not deemed confidential or proprietary by the
bank, paragraph h, summarized at the community district, borough, and
citywide levels of aggregation, for each deposit bank on the department's
website no later than November first of the year preceding the issuance of
the report. At least thirty days after such publication, but no later than
December fifteenth, the board shall hold a public hearing at which the public
may testify concerning the efforts and extent to which the deposit banks are
meaningfully addressing the credit and financial needs throughout the city.
The board shall also take written comments for at least thirty days preceding
such public hearing.



   5.   On or before March 1, 2013 and on or before March 1, 2014, the
board shall publish on the department's website, for each deposit bank, the
information collected pursuant to paragraphs a through g of subdivision 3 of
this section, and to the extent not deemed confidential or proprietary by the
bank, paragraph h, summarized at the community district, borough, and
citywide levels of aggregation. Each such publication of information shall
specifically identify any deposit bank's failure to provide information
requested in writing by the board pursuant to subdivision 3 of this section
that is applicable to such deposit bank.



Section 1525. City register.



   1.   There shall be within the department a city register who shall
be appointed by the mayor.



   2.   The functions, powers and duties formerly exercised by the
registers or registrars of the several counties shall remain with the city
register.



Section 1526. Office of city sheriff.



   1.   There shall be within the department an office of the city
sheriff which shall be subject to the supervision and control of the
commissioner of finance. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the
commissioner of finance may exercise or assign within the department such
management functions of the office of the sheriff, including but not limited
to those functions related to the appointment and removal of deputy sheriffs
and other personnel of such office pursuant to the civil service law, as he
or she may deem appropriate to achieve effective and efficient functioning
and management of such office.



   2.   Except as otherwise provided by law, the city sheriff shall
exercise the functions, powers and duties formerly exercised by the sheriffs
of the several counties.



Section 1527. Contracts with collection agencies.



   1.   Notwithstanding any other provisions of law to the contrary,
the commissioner may enter into contracts with collection agencies for the
collection of (i) any or all tax warrants and judgments for all city taxes
subject to collection by the department, other than real property taxes, or
(ii) city water and sewer charges, or both; provided however, that any such
contract shall be subject to the provisions of sections three hundred twelve
and three hundred thirteen.



   2.   Any such contract shall apply only to such tax warrants and
judgments and to such water and sewer charges as the commissioner may refer
to the collection agency, and shall be terminable at the will of the
commissioner.



   3.   The consideration to be paid to such collection agency may be a
percentage or percentages of the amount collected by such agency, or as
otherwise provided in the contract, but shall be within the amount
appropriated and available for such purpose.



   4.   No legal action to collect tax warrants and judgments or water
and sewer charges under any contract entered into pursuant to this section
shall be initiated without the express written permission of the corporation
counsel, and the selection of any attorney to take such legal action shall be
subject to the approval of the corporation counsel.



   5.   Before beginning performance of a contract authorized by
subdivision one of this section, the contracting collection agency shall give
security for faithful performance and shall provide such insurance policies,
including but not limited to a comprehensive general liability insurance,
naming the city as a party in interest, as the commissioner may require. The
adequacy and sufficiency of such security and insurance policies, as well as
the justification and acknowledgement thereof, shall be subject to the
approval of the comptroller. The commissioner, in his or her discretion, may
require additional security or insurance in such amounts and running to such
city officers and employees as the commissioner may require, to indemnify
them for any liability incurred by reason of any act or omission of such
collection agency.



   6.   No contract entered into pursuant to this section may be so
worded as to grant to any contracting collection agency the exclusive right
to perform any work authorized by this section.



Chapter 59: Department of General Services [Repealed]



Chapter 61: Department of Housing Preservation and Development



Section 1800. Department; commissioner.



   There shall be a department of housing preservation and development,
the head of which shall be the commissioner of housing preservation and
development.



Section 1801. Officials of the department.



   The commissioner may appoint not more than five deputy commissioners,
one of whom may be a first deputy commissioner and one of whom shall be a
deputy commissioner charged with the powers and duties that include, but are
not limited to, the powers and duties descrribed in paragraphs (j), (k), (l)
and (m) of subdivision six of section eighteen hundred two of this chapter.



Section 1802. Powers and duties of the commissioner.



   Except as otherwise specifically provided by law, the commissioner may
exercise or delegate any of the following functions, powers and duties which
are vested in the department:



      1.   all functions of the city relating to the rehabilitation,
maintenance, alteration and improvement of residential buildings and
privately owned housing including, but not limited to, the making of
rehabilitation loans pursuant to article eight ("municipal loans"), article
eight-a ("mini-loans") and article fifteen ("participation loans") of the
private housing finance law, acting as liaison with the New York city
rehabilitation mortgage insurance corporation established pursuant to article
fourteen of the private housing finance law ("REMIC") and the New York city
housing development corporation established pursuant to article twelve of the
private housing finance law ("HDC"), the execution of emergency repairs to
and the sealing, removal and demolition of buildings, structures and
privately-owned housing in accordance with applicable provisions of law and
the enforcement of those provisions of the multiple dwelling law or any other
law, rule or regulation which relate to the maintenance, use, occupancy,
safety or sanitary condition of any building or portion thereof which is
occupied, arranged or intended to be occupied as a home, residence or
dwelling place;



      2.   such functions and duties as may be prescribed by law
with respect to the relocation of tenants of real property and the selection
of tenants for publicly owned or publicly aided housing in the city;



      3.   all functions of the city, and all powers, rights and
duties as provided by any federal, state or local law or resolution, relating
to slum clearance, slum prevention and urban renewal; neighborhood
conservation; prevention and rehabilitation of blighted, substandard,
deteriorated or unsanitary areas, and publicly-aided and public housing,
including the regulation of rents in housing built with state or local
financing, except housing under the jurisdiction of the New York city housing
authority;



      4.   the functions, rights, powers and duties and the offices
granted to, vested in or delegated to the housing and redevelopment board,
the housing and development administration or the administrator of the
housing and development administration;



      5.   such powers, rights and duties vested in or exercised by
the New York city housing authority as may be transferred to or vested in the
city;



      6.   the functions, powers and duties to:



         (a)   establish and administer programs designed to
encourage the rehabilitation and preservation of existing housing;



         (b)   administer laws authorizing tax exemption or tax
abatement, or both, including, but not limited to, section 11-243 of the
administrative code of the city of New York and section four hundred
twenty-one of the real property tax law, which are in aid of the
construction, rehabilitation, alteration or improvement of residential
buildings and structures and the elimination of substandard conditions
therein, process applications for such exemption or abatement or both, and
coordinate the activities of officers and agencies of the city relating
thereto;



         (c)   manage and superintend all real property acquired
by the city for, or devoted to, housing or urban renewal purposes;



         (d)   represent the city in carrying out the provisions
of the private housing finance law including, but not limited to, article two
(relating to limited-profit housing companies), article five (relating to
redevelopment companies), article eight, article eight-a, article eleven
(relating to housing development fund companies) and article fifteen, and act
as and exercise the powers, rights and duties vested in the "supervising
agency" pursuant to the private housing finance law;



         (e)   represent the city in carrying out the provisions
of article fifteen of the general municipal law ("urban renewal law")
including, but not limited to, acquiring, leasing or disposing of real
property pursuant to said law and establishing the disposition price of real
property in an urban renewal area;



         (f)   undertake projects and exercise the rights, powers
and privileges authorized by sections fifty-five and fifty-five-a of the
public housing law;



         (g)   impose and collect charges and fees for the
financing, regulation, supervision and audit of municipality-aided projects
and loan programs administered by the commissioner, which charges and fees
shall be set aside in a special account for administrative expenses of the
department;



         (h)   act as the coordinating agency with respect to the
activities of officers and agencies of the city concerning areas designated
by the planning commission or any analogous officer or body, as districts for
development or improvement of neighborhoods;



         (i)   acquire real property, pursuant to the federal
housing and community development act of nineteen hundred seventy-four, on
behalf of other city agencies.



         (j)   sell, lease, exchange or otherwise dispose of
residential real property of the city, provided that no such sale, lease,
exchange or other disposition shall be authorized without the approval of the
mayor and until a public hearing has been held with respect to such action
after the publishing of notice in the City Record at least thirty days in
advance of such hearing, and provided further that any disposition by public
auction shall be conducted by the department of citywide administrative
services, except as otherwise provided by law;



         (k)   manage and superintend all residential real
property of the city not used for public purposes, including real property
acquired for a public purpose and not being currently utilized for such
purpose, but not wharf property or other real property under the jurisdiction
of the New York city transit authority, real property under the jurisdiction
of the department of small business services, or real property under the
jurisdiction of the New York city housing authority by virtue of an
authorization granted by the mayor pursuant to the provisions of subdivision
three of section one hundred twenty-five of the public housing law, or real
property under the jurisdiction of the triborough bridge and tunnel authority;



         (l)   exercise such other powers and duties as may be
prescribed by law in relation to the management, demolition or sealing or
other treatment of residential real property of the city; and



         (m)   employ professional community and other personnel
to manage residential real property of the city.



Section 1803. Inspectors, inspection.



   1.   Housing maintenance inspectors shall have such qualifications
as shall be prescribed by the department of citywide administrative services
after consultation with the commissioner.



   2.   The commissioner or any inspector or any officer of the
department authorized in writing by the commissioner or the commissioner's
delegate may, in accordance with law, for the purpose of performing their
respective official duties, enter and inspect any building, structure,
enclosure, premises or any part thereof, or anything therein or attached
thereto, and any refusal to permit such entry or inspection shall be a
misdemeanor triable in the criminal court and punishable upon conviction by
not more than thirty days imprisonment, or by a fine of not more than one
hundred dollars or both.



Section 1804. Acquisitions of real property.



   No purchase, lease, condemnation or other acquisition of real property
by the department shall be authorized until (1) a public hearing has been
held with respect to the acquisition after the publishing of notice in the
City Record at least thirty days in advance of such hearing and (2) the
department shall have received the approval of the mayor; provided, however,
that in the case of an acquisition by purchase or condemnation, no such
hearing shall be required if a public hearing is held with respect to such
purchase or condemnation pursuant to any other requirement of law. In the
case of a lease in which the city is to be the tenant, the notice for the
hearing required in this subdivision shall include a statement of the
location and proposed use of the premises, and the term and annual rent of
the proposed lease.



Section 1805. Establishment of affordable housing trust fund.



   1.   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary and in
addition to the functions, powers and duties that the commissioner may
exercise or delegate pursuant to section eighteen hundred two of this
chapter, the commissioner shall be authorized to establish or cause to be
established an affordable housing trust fund.



   2.   Such fund may be established through agreement with a public
benefit corporation authorized pursuant to the private housing finance law to
finance the development and rehabilitation of affordable housing.



   3.   The sole purpose of the fund established pursuant to
subdivision one of this section shall be to fund affordable housing outside
of the areas set forth in paragraphs two through four* of subdivision (a) of
section 11-245 of the administrative code of the city of New York.



   4.   Payments from such fund shall be subject to the following
requirements:



      (a)   Priority shall be given first to projects in the ten
sub-borough areas, as established by the United States census bureau, with
the highest percentage of households below the poverty line based on the most
recent United States census bureau data, with a target of forty percent of
the total amount of the fund as initially funded to be used in such areas;
and then to projects in the next five sub-borough areas, as established by
the United States census bureau, with the highest percentage of households
below the poverty line based on the most recent United States census bureau
data, with a target of fifteen percent of the total amount of the fund as
initially funded to be used in such areas.



      (b)   Priority shall be given to projects that will create
affordable housing for persons of low income as defined in rules of the
department in effect on the date of enactment of the local law that added
this paragraph.



      (c)   Priority shall be given to projects in which the
developer agrees to maintain the affordability of the housing significantly
beyond the period of the governmental assistance.



      (d)   Payments from such fund shall be made in accordance with
subsidy guidelines, including, but not limited to, guidelines concerning the
maximum amount of subsidy per dwelling unit and per project, established by
the commissioner or established in the agreement, if any, with the public
benefit corporation pursuant to subdivision two of this section provided
however, that no project may receive a subsidy in excess of twenty million
dollars.



      (e)   The aggregate payments from such fund in any calendar
year beginning on or after January first, two thousand seven shall not be
less than five percent of the total amount of the fund as initially funded,
provided, however, that in no calendar year shall a lesser amount be spent
other than pursuant to the written approval of the mayor.



   5.   On or before February first, two thousand eight and each year
thereafter, the commissioner shall report to the council on the payments from
the fund. Such report shall include a description of each project funded,
including location, number of units, affordability requirements, status of
the project and amount of funding for each project. Within forty-five days of
receipt of such report the council shall conduct a hearing on such report and
such fund created pursuant to this section.



Section 1806. Urban renewal data.



   1.   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following
terms have the following meanings:



      Project boundary. The term “project boundary” means the
perimeter of an urban renewal area.



      Urban renewal area. The term “urban renewal area” has the
same meaning ascribed to such term in section 502 of the general municipal
law.



      Urban renewal plan. The term “urban renewal plan” has the
same meaning ascribed to such term in section 502 of the general municipal
law.



      Urban renewal site. The term “urban renewal site” means a
tract of land that is designated for acquisition for one or more particular
land uses and identified as a redevelopment parcel pursuant to an urban
renewal plan.



   2.   Not less than one year before the expiration date of any urban
renewal plan in effect on or after March 1, 2018, the department, in
coordination with the department of city planning, shall provide written
notice of the expiration date of such urban renewal plan to the speaker of
the council, each borough president, council member, and community board
whose district includes any real property within the project boundary of the
affected urban renewal area, provided that in the case of any urban renewal
plan with an expiration date that is less than one year after March 1, 2018,
such notice shall be provided as soon as practicable. Such written notice
shall include any restrictions on use, density or design contained in such
expiring urban renewal plan, the status of any pending application to change
any applicable large-scale special permit, the status of any pending
application to amend such urban renewal plan, including any pending
application to extend the duration of such urban renewal plan with respect to
any unsold parcels of real property, the department of city planning
application number of such pending application, and a notice that upon
expiration of such urban renewal plan existing zoning regulations may allow
as-of-right development subject to less restrictive use, density, and design
requirements,



   3.   The department, in coordination with the department of city
planning, shall establish a publicly accessible website on nyc.gov to provide
information about currently and formerly designated urban renewal areas in
the city of New York. Such website shall include information regarding the
urban renewal law, an explanatory guide to researching urban renewal
restrictions on designated urban renewal sites, and links to resources for
conducting such research, including but not limited to the city’s online
zoning and land use maps, the automated city register information system, and
the land use and ceqr application tracking system. The department shall post
on such website an illustrative map of the city that indicates by graphical
representation or icon the approximate locations of all currently and
formerly designated urban renewal areas in the city of New York. The
department shall link each such graphical representation or icon to the
information about each such urban renewal area posted on such website
pursuant to this subdivision. The department shall post on such website the
following information or links to such information about each such urban
renewal area, to the extent that such information is available in department
or city records:



      (a)   The name of such urban renewal area;



      (b)   The history of approvals of the applicable urban renewal
plan and all amendments thereto;



      (c)   A downloadable copy of the applicable urban renewal area
and all amendments thereto;



      (d)   The project boundary of such urban renewal area;



      (e)   The designated urban renewal sites within the project
boundary of such urban renewal area and the permitted uses of such designated
urban renewal sites pursuant to such urban renewal plan;



      (f)   Whether such urban renewal plan is currently in effect
or has expired and, if currently in effect, the expiration date of such urban
renewal plan;



      (g)   With respect to any urban renewal plan currently in
effect, the status of any pending application to amend such urban renewal
plan, including any pending application to extend the duration of such urban
renewal plan with respect to any unsold parcels of real property, and the
department of city planning application number of such pending application;
and



      (h)   A link to zola.planninglabs.nyc or successor website
that directs to the highest practicable zoom level that contains all blocks
and lots within such urban renewal area.



   4.   Information required to be posted on the website established
pursuant to subdivision 3 of this section shall be posted on the following
schedule:



      (a)   The informational map of the city posted on such website
pursuant to subdivision 3 of this section shall display the approximate
locations of all current and former urban renewal areas no later than six
months after the effective date of the local law that added this section and
shall include links to the information about each such urban renewal area
posted on such website pursuant to such subdivision in accordance with the
scheduled posting of each such urban renewal plan as described in paragraphs
(b), (c) and (d) of this section.



      (b)   Such information about urban renewal areas subject to an
urban renewal plan currently in effect shall be posted to such website no
later than six months after the effective date of the local law that added
this section;



      (c)   Such information about urban renewal areas for which the
final version of an urban renewal plan expired less than 10 years before the
effective date of the local law that added this section shall be posted to
such website no later than one year after the effective date of the local law
that added this section; and



      (d)   Such information about urban renewal areas for which the
final version of an urban renewal plan expired 10 or more years before the
effective date of the local law that added this section shall be posted no
later than eighteen months after the effective date of the local law that
added this section.



      (e)   Notwithstanding paragraphs (b), (c) and (d) of this
subdivision, the downloadable copy of all amendments to applicable urban
renewal areas referred to in paragraph (c) of subdivision 3 of this section,
as required to be posted on the website established pursuant to subdivision 3
of this section, shall be posted as soon as practicable, but no later than 5
years after the effective date of the local law that added this section.



   5.   No later than two years after the effective date of the local
law that added this section, the department shall report the following
information to the mayor, the speaker of the council, the borough presidents,
the affected council members, and the community boards, to the extent that
such information is available in department or city records:



      (a)   Maps displaying the project boundaries of all currently
and formerly designated urban renewal areas in the city of New York, to the
extent practicable;



      (b)    An illustrative map or maps of the city displaying the
approximate locations of all such urban renewal areas;



      (c)   A list, organized by borough, of all such urban renewal
areas;



      (d)   The council districts that may include real property
within the project boundary of any such urban renewal area;



      (e)   For each such urban renewal area, the expiration date of
the final version of the applicable urban renewal plan;



      (f)   The land use restrictions imposed pursuant to such urban
renewal plans; and



      (g)   A notice that upon expiration of such urban renewal
plans existing zoning regulations may allow as-of-right development subject
to less restrictive use, density, and design requirements. Such notice shall
be accompanied by information about researching urban renewal restrictions on
currently and previously designated urban renewal sites.



   6.   No later than March 1, 2018, every lot on the city’s online
zoning and land use map at zola.planninglabs.nyc or successor website shall
have an attribute that links to the website established pursuant to
subdivision 3 of this section.



(L.L. 2018/040, 1/11/2018)



Chapter 63: Business Integrity Commission



Section 2100. Business integrity commission.



   a.   There shall be a business integrity commission, which shall
consist of a full-time chairperson appointed by the mayor and of the
commissioners of the department of small business services, the department of
consumer affairs, the department of investigation, the police department and
the department of sanitation, or their designees.



   b.   The chairperson may appoint a first deputy who shall possess
all the powers and perform all the duties of the chairperson during the
absence or disability of the chairperson and in case of the death of the
chairperson or of a vacancy in that office shall act as chairperson until the
appointment of a chairperson by the mayor.



   c.   The chairperson shall have charge of the organization of the
commission and shall have authority to employ, assign and superintend the
duties of such officers and employees as may be necessary to carry out the
provisions of this chapter. In addition, the commissioner of any agency
represented on the commission or the commissioner of any other appropriate
city agency may, if requested, provide staff and other assistance with
respect to any matter within the jurisdiction of the commission.



Section 2101. Jurisdiction; powers and duties.



   a.   The business integrity commission shall be responsible for the
regulation of the trade waste industry, the shipboard gambling industry, the
fulton fish market distribution area and other seafood distribution areas and
the public wholesale markets. In regulating such industries, areas and
markets, the commission shall have the powers and duties conferred by this
chapter and such other powers and duties as are conferred by law.



   b.   The powers and duties of the business integrity commission
shall be exercised in a manner consistent with all local laws governing the
regulation of the trade waste industry, the shipboard gambling industry, the
fulton fish market distribution area and other seafood distribution areas and
the public wholesale markets and shall include but not be limited to the
following:



      1.   to establish standards for the issuance, denial,
suspension and revocation of licenses and other authorizations necessary for
the operation of businesses in the industries, areas and markets it
regulates; and to issue, deny, suspend and revoke such licenses and other
authorizations;



      2.   to investigate any matter within its jurisdiction and to
have full power to compel the attendance, examine and take testimony under
oath of such persons as it may deem necessary in relation to such
investigation, and to require the production of books, accounts, papers and
other evidence relevant to such investigation;



      3.   to establish standards for service provided by, and for
the conduct of, regulated businesses;



      4.   to conduct studies of, or investigations into, any matter
within its jurisdiction in order to assist the city in formulating policies
relating to the industries, areas and markets it regulates;



      5.   to create and disseminate materials on any matter within
its jurisdiction in order to advise or educate regulated businesses and
members of the public regarding such matters;



      6.   to adopt rules necessary or appropriate to carry out the
powers and duties conferred on it by law;



      7.   to establish fees to enable it to effectuate the purposes
of this chapter, including fees sufficient to cover the costs of processing
applications and conducting investigations; and



      8.   to enforce compliance with applicable laws and rules
through the imposition of fines and penalties.



Section 2102. Cooperation with other agencies.



   The business integrity commission shall provide such assistance to the
mayor and other agencies as requested and shall establish liaison and
information-sharing arrangements with other law enforcement, prosecutorial,
investigative and regulatory agencies as it deems appropriate.



Chapter 64: Department of Consumer Affairs



Section 2201. Department; commissioner.



   There shall be a department of consumer affairs, the head of which
shall be the commissioner of consumer affairs.



Section 2202. Deputies.



   The commissioner may appoint two deputies.



Section 2203. Powers of the commissioner.



   (a)   The commissioner shall plan, make recommendations, conduct
research and develop programs for consumer education and protection,
facilitate the exchange and dissemination of information in consultation with
agencies, federal and state officials, commercial interests, private groups
and others working in this field and coordinate the consumer protection
activities of other city agencies.



   (b)   The commissioner shall enforce all laws in relation to weights
and measures.



   (c)   The commissioner shall have cognizance and control of the
granting, issuing, transferring, renewing, revoking, suspending and
cancelling of all licenses and permits, except in the cases with respect to
which and to the extent to which any of said powers are conferred on other
persons or agency by laws, and shall collect all fees for licenses and
permits the collection of which by some other person or agency is not
authorized by law.



   (d)   The commissioner shall enforce all laws relating to the
advertising and offering for sale and the sale of all commodities, goods,
wares and services; in addition he shall receive and evaluate complaints and
initiate his own investigations relating to these matters and take
appropriate action, including referral to a federal or state agency.



   (e)   The commissioner shall have all powers as set forth in:



      (1)   chapter 8 of title 20 of the administrative code
relating to the receipt, investigation, and resolution of complaints
thereunder regarding earned sick time, and the power to conduct
investigations regarding violation of such chapter upon his or her own
initiative; and



      (2)   section 22-507 of the administrative code relating to
the receipt, investigation, and resolution of complaints thereunder regarding
the retention of grocery workers, and the power to conduct investigations
regarding violations of such section upon his or her own initiative.



   (f)   The commissioner, in the performance of said functions,
including those functions pursuant to subdivision e of this section, shall be
authorized to hold public and private hearings, administer oaths, take
testimony, serve subpoenas, receive evidence, and to receive, administer, pay
over and distribute monies collected in and as a result of actions brought
for violations of laws relating to deceptive or unconscionable trade
practices, or of related laws, and to promulgate, amend and modify rules and
regulations necessary to carry out the powers and duties of the department.



   (g)   The commissioner shall exercise the powers of a commissioner
of public markets under the agriculture and markets law with respect to open
air markets.



   (h)   (1)   Notwithstanding any inconsistent provision of law,
the department shall be authorized, upon due notice and hearing, to impose
civil penalties for the violation of any laws or rules the enforcement of
which is within the jurisdiction of the department pursuant to this charter,
the administrative code or any other general, special or local law. The
department shall have the power to render decisions and orders and to impose
civil penalties for all such violations, and to order equitable relief for
and payment of monetary damages in connection with enforcement of chapter 8
of title 20 of the administrative code. Except to the extent that dollar
limits are otherwise specifically provided, such civil penalties shall not
exceed five hundred dollars for each violation. All proceedings authorized
pursuant to this subdivision shall be conducted in accordance with rules
promulgated by the commissioner. The remedies and penalties provided for in
this subdivision shall be in addition to any other remedies or penalties
provided for the enforcement of such provisions under any other law
including, but not limited to, civil or criminal actions or proceedings.



      (2)   All such proceedings shall be commenced by the service
of a notice of violation. The commissioner shall prescribe the form and
wording of notices of violation. The notice of violation or copy thereof when
filled in and served shall constitute notice of the violation charged, and,
if sworn to or affirmed, shall be prima facie evidence of the facts contained
therein.



      (3)   For the purposes of this subdivision, no act or practice
shall be deemed a deceptive trade practice unless it has been declared a
deceptive trade practice and described with reasonable particularity in a
local law or in a rule or regulation promulgated by the commissioner.



      (4)   Notwithstanding any other inconsistent provision of law,
powers conferred upon the department by this subdivision may be exercised by
the office of administrative trials and hearings consistent with orders of
the mayor issued in accordance with subdivisions two and three of section one
thousand forty-eight of this charter.



   (i)   [Repealed.]



(Am. L.L. 2015/104, 11/30/2015, eff. 3/29/2016; Am. L.L. 2016/011, 2/8/2016,
eff. 5/8/2016)



Section 2204. Consumers council.



   There shall be in the department a consumers council which shall advise
the commissioner on general goals for the development of programs, undertake
studies and reports, and foster cooperation among city, state and federal
agencies and private groups. The council shall consist of the commissioner,
ex officio, and twelve members to be appointed by the mayor to serve for
three years except that of the twelve members first appointed, four shall be
appointed for a term of three years, four for a term of two years and four
for a term of one year. One of these twelve shall be appointed chairman
annually by the mayor. The members shall represent a cross section of
consumer interests. They shall serve without compensation but shall be
reimbursed for expenses necessarily incurred in the performance of their
duties.



Chapter 65: New York City Taxi and Limousine Commission



Section 2300. Commission.



   There shall be a New York city taxi and limousine commission, the
purposes of which shall be the continuance, further development and
improvement of taxi and limousine service in the city of New York. It shall
be the further purpose of the commission, consonant with the promotion and
protection of the public comfort and convenience to adopt and establish an
overall public transportation policy governing taxi, coach, limousine,
wheelchair accessible van services and commuter van services as it relates to
the overall public transportation network of the city; to establish certain
rates, standards of service, standards of insurance and minimum coverage;
standards for driver safety, standards for equipment safety and design;
standards for noise and air pollution control; and to set standards and
criteria for the licensing of vehicles, drivers and chauffeurs, owners and
operators engaged in such services; all as more particularly set forth herein.



Section 2301. Membership of commission.



   a.   The commission shall consist of nine members to be appointed by
the mayor with the advice and consent of the city council; five of said
members, one resident from each of the five boroughs of New York city, shall
be recommended for appointment by a majority vote of the councilmen of the
respective borough.



   b.   Such members shall be appointed for terms of seven years. The
members shall first be appointed to serve as follows:



      1.   Five members recommended by the city council for a term
of two years.



      2.   Two members for a term of four years.



      3.   Two members for a term of six years.



   Each such other member shall serve until the appointment and
qualification of a successor. For the purpose of fixing the expiration of
terms, they shall be deemed to have commenced on the first day of February in
the year of appointment and qualification, irrespective of the actual date of
appointment and qualification. Vacancies other than by expiration of a term
shall be filled for the unexpired term. The mayor may remove any such member
for cause, upon stated charges. Notwithstanding the provisions of this
paragraph, any public officer appointed to the commission shall serve only
during the period that he holds such public office and shall receive no
additional compensation.



   c.   The mayor shall designate one member of the commission to act
as the chairman and chief executive officer. The chairman shall have charge
of the organization of its office and have authority to employ, assign and
superintend the duties of such officers and employees as may be necessary to
carry out the provisions of this chapter. The chairman shall devote his full
time to this position and as such he shall receive compensation.



   d.   The other members of the commission shall not be entitled to
com- pensation.



   e.   A majority of the whole number of members of the commission
then in office shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of any business.
The commission shall have power to act by a majority of its members.



Section 2302. Reports of commission.



   a.   All proceedings of the commission and all documents and records
in its possession shall be public records and the commission shall make an
annual report to the city council on or before the second Monday of January
in each year. Such annual report shall contain information regarding
complaints received by the commission from the public, including, but not
limited to, complaints of overcharging, as well as enforcement actions
undertaken by the commission, whether the enforcement action was dismissed or
settled, or if a penalty was imposed by the commission on the subject of the
enforcement action. The information regarding enforcement actions shall
include, but not be limited to, enforcement actions relating to illegal
street hails, unlicensed vehicles, overcharging, and toll lane infractions.
The complaint and enforcement action information shall be disaggregated by
the type of license held by the person or entity who is the subject of the
complaint or action and the month during which the complaint was received or
enforcement action undertaken. Enforcement actions shall be further
disaggregated by the subject matter of the action and geographic location.
Complaint information shall be further disaggregated to the extent
practicable by the subject matter of the complaint. In addition to inclusion
in the commission's annual report, the disaggregated complaint and
enforcement information shall be posted on the commission's website updated
no less than monthly. Information shall be published in a manner that does
not identify the individual parties involved in the actions reported upon in
this section. The chairman of the city council committee on transportation
may at any time direct the commission or the chairman of the commission to
appear before the committee to give testimony pertaining thereto, and to
furnish to the members of the council any reports deemed necessary.



   b.   The commission shall make a quarterly report to the city
council on or before the second Monday of March, June, September and December
in each year. Each such quarterly report shall contain information for the
immediately preceding quarter regarding the average wait time to secure a
vehicle inspection at the commission's assigned inspection facility as
required under the rules of the commission. Such report shall also contain
the number of instances when the wait for an inspection exceeds four weeks.
All information shall be disaggregated by vehicle type.



Section 2303. Jurisdiction, powers and duties of commission.



   a.   The jurisdiction, powers and duties of the commission shall
include the regulation and supervision of the business and industry of
transportation of persons by licensed vehicles for hire in the city, pursuant
to provisions of this chapter. Except as otherwise provided herein, charges
of violations of the provisions of the administrative code and rules
promulgated thereunder shall be adjudicated by the administrative tribunal
established by the commission and governed by the citywide administrative
procedure act.



   b.   Such regulation and supervision shall extend to:



      1.   The regulation and supervision of rates of fare to be
charged and collected.



      2.   The regulation and supervision of standards and
conditions of service.



      3.   The revocation and suspension of licenses for vehicles,
other than licenses issued pursuant to state law, provided, however, that
taxicab licenses represented by medallions heretofore issued shall in all
respects remain valid in accordance with their terms and transferable
according to law.



      4.   Taxicab licenses represented by medallions which have
heretofore been surrendered are hereby revoked. Additional taxicab licenses
may be issued from time to time only upon the enactment of a local law
providing therefor. Any nontransferable licenses shall be deemed revoked upon
the surrender by or death of the holder thereof.



      5.   The issuance, revocation, suspension of licenses for
drivers, chauffeurs, owners or operators of vehicles, other than licenses
issued pursuant to state law, and for taxicab brokers and the establishment
of qualifying standards required for such licensees.



      6.   Requirements of standards of safety, and design, comfort,
convenience, noise and air pollution control and efficiency in the operation
of vehicles and auxiliary equipment.



      7.   Requirements for the maintenance of financial
responsibility, insurance and minimum coverage.



      8.   The establishment of, and the requirement of adherence
to, uniform system of accounts, with the right of the commission to inspect
books and records and to require the submission of such reports as the
commission may determine.



      9.   The development and effectuation of a broad public policy
of transportation affected by this chapter as it relates to forms of public
transportation in the city, including innovation and experimentation in
relation to type and design of equipment, modes of service and manner of
operation, which for limited purposes and limited periods of time may depart
from the requirements otherwise established for licensed vehicles pursuant to
this chapter.



      10.   Assistance to the business and industry of public
transportation affected by this chapter in aid of the continuation,
development and improvement of service and the safety and convenience of the
public, including assistance in securing federal and state grants.



      11.   The formulation, promulgation and effectuation of rules
and regulations reasonably designed to carry out the purposes, terms and
provisions of this chapter.



   c.   (1)   The commission shall create an administrative tribunal
to adjudicate charges of violation of provisions of the administrative code
and rules promulgated thereunder. The commission shall have the power to
enforce its tribunal's decisions and orders imposing civil penalties, not to
exceed ten thousand dollars for each respondent, for violations relating to
unlicensed vehicles for hire and unlicensed drivers of vehicles for hire* and
for violations relating to the operation of commuter van services without
authorization and the operation of unlicensed commuter vans and unlicensed
drivers of commuter vans pursuant to chapter five of title nineteen of the
administrative code* as if they were money judgments, without court
proceedings, in the following manner: Any such decision or order of the
commission's administrative tribunal imposing a civil penalty, whether the
adjudication was had by hearing or upon default or otherwise, shall
constitute a judgment rendered by the commission which may be entered in the
civil court of New York or any other place provided for the entry of civil
judgments within the state. Before a judgment based upon a default may be so
entered the commission or administrative tribunal shall have first notified
the respondent by first class mail in such form as the commission may direct:
(i) of the default and order and the penalty imposed; (ii) that a judgment
will be entered in the civil court of the city of New York or any other place
provided by law for the entry of civil judgments within the state of New
York; and (iii) that entry of such judgment may be avoided by requesting a
stay of default for good cause shown and either requesting a hearing or
entering a plea pursuant to** the rules of the commission or administrative
tribunal within thirty days of** the mailing of such notice.



      (2)   The commission or tribunal shall not enter any decision
or order pursuant to paragraph one of this subdivision unless the notice of
violation shall have been served in the same manner as is prescribed for
service of process by article three of the civil practice law and rules or
article three of the business corporation law except that: (a) with respect
to any notice of violation which alleges the operation of an unlicensed
vehicle for hire the operator of such vehicle who is not the owner thereof
but who uses or operates such vehicle with the permission of the owner,
express or implied, shall be deemed to be the agent of such owner to receive
such notice of violation and service made pursuant to this paragraph on such
operator shall also be deemed to be lawful service upon such owner; or (b)
with respect to any notice of violation which alleges the operation of an
unauthorized commuter van service or an unlicensed commuter van, the operator
of the vehicle giving rise to such violation who is not the owner of such
commuter van service or such commuter van, as applicable, but who uses or
operates such vehicle with the permission, express or implied, of the owner
of such commuter van service or such commuter van, as the case may be, shall
be deemed to be the agent of the owner of such commuter van service or such
commuter van, as the case may be, to receive such notice of violation.
Service made pursuant to this paragraph on such operator shall be deemed to
be lawful service upon the owner of such commuter van service or commuter
van, as applicable.



   d.   No resolution of approval of a pilot program shall be approved
by the commission unless such resolution is posted in a prominent location on
the commission's website and electronically transmitted to each member of the
commission at least three calendar days, exclusive of Sundays, prior to the
commission's vote to approve or reject such resolution of approval; provided,
however, that revisions may be made to a resolution of approval for a pilot
program posted online and sent electronically in conformity with this
subdivision at any time prior to a vote on such resolution if such revisions
are approved by all members of the commission by unanimous consent.



Section 2304. Rates.



   a.   The amount to be charged and collected for the hire of a
taxicab for one or more passengers within the city of New York shall be the
total of the following items:



      1.   For the first one-fifth mile or fraction thereof, or the
first one minute of waiting time or fraction thereof, or the combination
thereof, sixty cents.



      2.   For each additional one-fifth mile or fraction thereof,
or seventy-two seconds of waiting time or fraction thereof, or the
combination thereof, ten cents.



      3.   Fifty cents for each trunk.



      4.   All bridge and tunnel and ferry tolls.



      5.   There shall be no charge for personal luggage or for
other belongings of the passengers transported in the interior of the taxicab.



   b.   Hereafter, and notwithstanding the rates set forth in paragraph
a of this section, the commission shall prescribe, revise and otherwise
regulate reasonable rates of fare which may be charged and collected for each
type of service rendered.



   c.   In determining the rates of fare, the commission may consider
all facts which in its judgment have a bearing on a proper determination,
with due regard among other things to the time and distance of travel, to the
character of the service provided, to the gross revenues derived from
operation, to the net return derived from operation, to the expenses of
operation including the income of drivers or operators, to the return upon
capital actually expended and the necessity of making reservations out of
income for surplus and contingencies, to the number of passengers
transported, to the effect of fares upon the public and in relation to the
fares for other forms of public transportation, and to the fares and
practices with respect to similar services in other cities of the United
States.



   d.   No determination by the commission changing the rates of fare
shall be made except after a public hearing before the commission, at which
evidence shall be taken.



   e.   At any public hearing involving a change in the rates of fare,
the burden of proof to show that existing rates are not reasonable shall be
upon such segment of the business or industry affected by this chapter as is
involved in the change in rates.



   f.   The costs reasonably attributable to a public hearing involving
a change in the rates of fare, including the expenses of the commission and
the compensation of its officers, agents and employees, shall be charged to
and paid by such segment of the business or industry affected by this chapter
as is involved in the change in rates.



Section 2305. Office of inclusion.



   a.   Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms have
the following meanings:



      Director. The term “director” means the director of the
office of inclusion.



      Driver. The term “driver” means any driver licensed by the
commission.



      Office. The term “office” means the office of inclusion.



   b.   The commission shall establish an office of inclusion. Such
office shall be headed by a director.



   c.   The director shall have the power and duty to:



      1.   Compile and report statistics relating to driver
demographics, disaggregated by ethnicity or race, gender, disability and
other categories as appropriate;



      2.   Compile and report statistics relating to discrimination
against passengers or prospective passengers on the basis of ethnicity or
race, gender, disability and other categories as appropriate;



      3.   Examine and address issues related to discrimination in
the taxi and for-hire vehicle industry, including but not limited to refusals
by drivers to provide service to passengers or prospective passengers on the
basis of ethnicity or race, disability, gender, sexual orientation or
destination;



      4.   Develop policies and best practices to encourage greater
representation of drivers from members of communities underserved by taxi and
for-hire vehicle transportation services;



      5.   Develop and implement trainings for drivers that promote
cultural sensitivity towards passengers and prospective passengers and
educate drivers about discriminatory treatment in the taxi and for-hire
vehicle industry. Such trainings shall be conducted by persons with
experience. Such trainings shall include best practices on how drivers can
meet the needs of passengers with disabilities, including but not limited to
caring for mobility devices, communicating with persons who are hearing
impaired and alerting passengers with visual impairments awaiting a ride once
the vehicle has arrived;



      6.   Assess the feasibility of driver-to-driver mentorship and
cultural awareness programs which the commission may implement as warranted;



      7.   Expand public awareness regarding service refusals by
drivers through means such as, but not limited to, running a public awareness
campaign and conducting outreach to community groups whose members have
experienced service refusals;



      8.   Provide one or more mechanisms by which passengers and
prospective passengers can submit complaints of discrimination directly to
the commission, and ensure such complaints are processed by the appropriate
authorities;



      9.   Serve as a resource to support the needs of persons with
disabilities in receiving services from vehicles licensed by the commission;
and



      10.   Perform any other relevant duties as the commission
deems appropriate.



   d.   Within 12 months of the effective date of the local law that
added this section, and annually thereafter for the next three years, the
director shall post on the commission’s website and submit to the mayor and
the speaker of the council a report containing, at a minimum, the findings
required by paragraphs 1 and 2 of subdivision c of this section. The report
shall also contain information on the programs and resources described in
paragraphs 4, 5, 6, 7 and 8 of subdivision c of this section, including
statistics on how many people utilized these programs and resources.



(L.L. 2018/219, 12/15/2018, eff. 3/15/2019)



Editor's note: Section 2 of L.L. 2018/219 provides that subdivision d. of
this section shall expire and be repealed four years after the effective date
of the local law that added this section.



Chapter 66: Department For the Aging



Section 2400. Department; commissioner.



   There shall be a department for the aging, the head of which shall be
the commissioner for the aging.



Section 2401. Deputies.



   The commissioner may appoint and at pleasure remove a deputy
commissioner.



Section 2402. Powers and duties.



   The department shall have the following powers and duties:



      a.   to stimulate community interest in the problems of the
aging;



      b.   to promote public awareness of resources available for
the aging, and to refer the public to appropriate departments and agencies of
the city, state and federal governments for advice, assistance and available
services in connection with particular problems;



      c.   to cooperate with and assist local neighborhoods in the
development of programs and the establishment of local offices;



      d.   to serve as a clearing house for information relating to
the needs of the aging;



      e.   to disburse available city, state and federal funds to
programs throughout the city and, when practical, coordinate such funds with
available funding from the private sector;



      f.   to promulgate rules and regulations for the operation of
facilities, services and programs under its jurisdiction; and



      g.   to maintain, operate and control such programs and
facilities as may be necessary or required for the proper administration of
the department.



Section 2403. Advisory council.



   a.   There shall be in the department an advisory council consisting
of thirty-one members at least sixteen of whom shall be recipients of
services rendered to the elderly. These members shall include representatives
from the areas of social service, health care, the academic community and
local neighborhoods.



   b.   It shall be the duty of the council to advise the commissioner
and make recommendations. The council shall submit an annual report of its
activities to the mayor.



   c.   The members of the council shall be appointed by the mayor. Ten
of said members, two residents from each of the five boroughs of the city,
shall be recommended for appointment by a majority vote of the city council
members of the respective boroughs.



   d.   The terms of office of the thirty-one members of the council
first appointed shall be as follows: eleven appointees, five of whom shall be
recommended for appointment by the city council members of the respective
boroughs, one from each borough, shall serve for a term ending the
thirty-first day of March, nineteen hundred eighty-one; ten appointees shall
serve for a term ending the thirty-first day of March, nineteen hundred
eighty-two; and ten appointees, five of whom shall be recommended for
appointment by the city council members of the respective boroughs, one from
each borough, shall serve for a term ending the thirty-first day of March,
nineteen hundred eighty-three. Upon the expiration of such terms, the terms
of office of their successors shall be three years. Vacancies occurring
otherwise than by expiration of term shall be filled for the unexpired term
in the same manner as regular appointments.



   e.   The mayor shall designate one of the members of the council to
be chairman and one to be vice-chairman.



   f.   The members of the council shall serve without compensation.



Chapter 67: Department of Cultural Affairs



Section 2501. Department; commissioner.



   There shall be a department of cultural affairs, the head of which
shall be the commissioner of cultural affairs.



Section 2502. Deputies.



   The commissioner may appoint a deputy.



Section 2503. Powers and duties of commissioner.



   Except as otherwise provided by law, the commissioner shall have the
power and duty:



      (a)   to plan, acquire, design, construct, improve and manage
facilities for the conduct of cultural activities by the city and, to the
extent possible, to use the resources of other agencies to perform design and
planning functions subject to the approval of such agencies;



      (b)   to plan, develop, conduct and supervise such cultural
activities; and



      (c)   to foster coordination among city, state and federal
agencies, other organizations and institutions with respect to cultural
activities in the city.



Section 2504. Budget estimates of cultural institutions.



   The capital and expense budget estimates, to the extent involving
expenditures to be paid from the city treasury, of all institutions or other
organizations engaging in cultural activities in the city, shall be submitted
to the commissioner, who shall submit such expense budget estimates to the
director of management and budget and such capital budget estimates to the
mayor, the borough presidents, the council, and the city planning commission
in accordance with law, together with the commissioner's recommendations.



Section 2505. Cultural affairs advisory commission.



   1.   There shall be in the department a cultural affairs advisory
commission consisting of not fewer than fifteen nor more than twenty-one
members, exclusive of a deputy mayor, the commissioner of cultural affairs,
and the commissioner of parks and recreation, who shall serve as ex-officio
members. The members of the advisory commission shall serve without
compensation.



   2.   a.   Members other than ex-officio members shall be
appointed by the mayor for a term of three years and provided that of those
members first taking office one-third shall serve for one year, one-third
shall serve for two years and the remainder shall serve for three years.
Notwithstanding the date of appointment, the terms of members first taking
office shall be deemed to commence on the effective date of this chapter.



      b.   The mayor shall designate one of the members of the
commission to be chairman and one to be vice-chairman.



   3.   The commission shall advise the commissioner and the mayor with
respect to cultural activities in the city and in furtherance of this
function shall:



      a.   formulate and recommend goals with regard to cultural
activities and policy;



      b.   foster coordination among city, state and federal
agencies and other organizations and institutions with respect to cultural
activities;



      c.   compile data and reports and submit its findings to the
commissioner and the mayor; and



      d.   perform such other related functions and duties which
may, from time to time, be deemed appropriate by the mayor.



   4.   All city agencies are directed to cooperate with the
commission, consistent with the law, in order to coordinate and promote
cultural activities in this city.



Section 2506. Cultural plan.



   1.   On or before July 1, 2017, the commissioner shall submit to the
mayor and speaker of the council and post on the department's website a
comprehensive cultural plan. The department shall be the primary agency
responsible for developing, implementing, and overseeing the cultural plan.



   2.   The cultural affairs advisory commission shall advise the
department with respect to the cultural plan in accordance with section
twenty-five hundred five of this charter.



   3.   The department shall establish a citizens' advisory committee
to advise the department with respect to the development of the cultural
plan, gathering community input for such plan, and how to implement such
plan. The commissioner shall determine the size and composition of such
committee consistent with the provisions set forth in paragraph a of this
subdivision.



      a.   The citizens' advisory committee shall consist of a
minimum of twelve members. Each borough president shall appoint one member,
the speaker of the council shall appoint at least three members, and the
mayor shall appoint at least three members, provided that the speaker and
mayor shall have an equal number of appointments, exclusive of the chair of
such committee who shall be appointed by the commissioner. Such committee
shall consist of members whose backgrounds and experiences are relevant to
the plan and who collectively represent a variety of interests relevant to
the plan. The members appointed by the speaker of the council shall include
at least one representative of a cultural institution that is a member of the
Cultural Institutions Group and at least two members meeting the following
description: a representative of a community-based organization whose
principal purpose is the promotion or support of cultural activities; an
individual with background and experience in business; an individual with
background and experience in real estate; a representative of a charitable
organization; an individual with background and experience in public housing;
or a representative of a borough arts council. All committee members shall
serve without compensation.



      b.   Appointments to the citizens' advisory committee shall
occur not more than ninety days after the effective date of this section. Any
vacancy in membership shall be filled in the same manner as the original
appointment.



      c.   Prior to the submission of the cultural plan, the
citizens' advisory committee shall meet as often as needed, as determined by
the committee in consultation with the department, but not less than
quarterly. Following the submission of the cultural plan, and subject to the
provisions of paragraph d of this subdivision, the citizens' advisory
committee shall meet as needed, but not more than semiannually, to review the
biannual reports required pursuant to subdivision nine of this section.



      d.   The citizens' advisory committee shall cease to exist
following its submission to the commissioner of any recommendations it may
make following its review of the second biannual report required pursuant to
subdivision nine of this section, or five years following the submission of
the cultural plan, whichever is shorter.



   4.   The cultural plan shall address, but not be limited to:



      a.   the availability and distribution of cultural activities
throughout the city;



      b.   the relationship between cultural activities and social
and economic health and welfare in the city;



      c.   the role of the community outreach process in the
development of the plan;



      d.   feedback from a robust community outreach process;



      e.   the needs of artists with respect to affordable housing
and affordable long-term and temporary studio, office, and rehearsal space;



      f.   increasing arts education and cultural activities in the
schools of the city school district;



      g.   how cultural activities can be incorporated into
community development, economic development and land use planning processes
and policies;



      h.   the needs of artists and communities with respect to the
creation of public art in public settings; and



      i.   a plan of how city agencies will coordinate with respect
to cultural activities, as consistent with the law.



   5.   The cultural plan may refer to data sets relevant to the plan.



   6.   The cultural plan shall, where feasible, utilize technology to
enhance outreach and communication of the planning process.



   7.   All recommendations, initiatives, and priorities included in
the cultural plan shall be designated, if known, as short-, medium-, or
long-term.



   8.   The department and other relevant agencies shall consider the
conclusions and recommendations in the cultural plan and may act upon such
recommendations as appropriate.



   9.   Beginning two years following the submission of the cultural
plan and every two years thereafter, the department shall submit to the mayor
and the speaker a report detailing progress made on the recommendations,
initiatives and priorities that result from such plan. The cultural affairs
advisory commission and the citizens' advisory committee, during such
committee's existence, shall review such biannual report and may make
recommendations to the commissioner. The commissioner shall consider any
recommendations received from the cultural affairs advisory commission and
the citizens' advisory committee.



   10.   The cultural plan may be revised as appropriate every ten
years.



Section 2507. Data on cultural institutions group.



   1.   For purposes of this section:



      Cultural institutions group. The term "cultural institutions
group" means the group of cultural institutions that operate on city-owned
property and are recognized by the department as members of such group.



      Public school student. The term "public school student" means any
pupil under the age of 21 who does not have a high school diploma and who is
enrolled in a school of the city school district of the city of New York or a
charter school that is located within the city of New York, not including
pre-kindergarten students.



      Non-public school student. The term "non-public school student"
means any pupil under the age of 21 who does not meet the definition of
public school student in this paragraph, who does not have a high school
diploma, and who is enrolled in a school serving students in the elementary,
middle or high school grades, or any combination thereof, that is located
within the city of New York, not including pre-kindergarten students.



   2.   No later than September 17, 2017, and annually no later than
September 17 of each year, the department shall send to the council, or shall
include in the mayor's management report prepared pursuant to section 12 of
the charter, data in the aggregate regarding the cultural institutions group
to the extent such data is made available to the department, including at a
minimum:



      a.   total visitor attendance;



      b.   number of free or reduced-price visits;



      c.   total attendance by public school students through
school-organized visits;



      d.   total attendance by non-public school students through
school-organized visits;



      e.   number of partnerships with public schools;



      f.   total number of free admission hours;



      g.   number of programs, such as performances, exhibitions,
and lectures, related to the cultural institution's mission or discipline and
targeted to a general audience; and



      h.   number of programs that are targeted to or designed to
reach specific groups of people including, but not limited to, seniors or
youth.



(L.L. 2017/009, 2/15/2017)



Chapter 68: Conflicts of Interest



Section 2600. Preamble.



   Public service is a public trust. These prohibitions on the conduct of
public servants are enacted to preserve the trust placed in the public
servants of the city, to promote public confidence in government, to protect
the integrity of government decision-making and to enhance government
efficiency.



Section 2601. Definitions.



   As used in this chapter:



      1.   "Advisory committee" means a committee, council, board or
similar entity constituted to provide advice or recommendations to the city
and having no authority to take a final action on behalf of the city or take
any action which would have the effect of conditioning, limiting or requiring
any final action by any other agency, or to take any action which is
authorized by law.



      2.   "Agency" means a city, county, borough or other office,
position, administration, department, division, bureau, board, commission,
authority, corporation, advisory committee or other agency of government, the
expenses of which are paid in whole or in part from the city treasury, and
shall include but not be limited to the council, the offices of each elected
official, the board of education, community school boards, community boards,
the financial services corporation, the health and hospitals corporation, the
public development corporation, and the New York city housing authority, but
shall not include any court or any corporation or institution maintaining or
operating a public library, museum, botanical garden, arboretum, tomb,
memorial building, aquarium, zoological garden or similar facility.



      3.   "Agency served by a public servant" means (a) in the case
of a paid public servant, the agency employing such public servant or (b) in
the case of an unpaid public servant, the agency employing the official who
has appointed such unpaid public servant unless the body to which the unpaid
public servant has been appointed does not report to, or is not under the
control of, the official or the agency of the official that has appointed the
unpaid public servant, in which case the agency served by the unpaid public
servant is the body to which the unpaid public servant has been appointed.



      4.   "Appear" means to make any communication, for
compensation, other than those involving ministerial matters.



      5.   A person or firm "associated" with a public servant
includes a spouse, domestic partner, child, parent or sibling; a person with
whom the public servant has a business or other financial relationship; and
each firm in which the public servant has a present or potential interest.



      6.   "Blind trust" means a trust in which a public servant, or
the public servant's spouse, domestic partner, or unemancipated child, has a
beneficial interest, the holdings and sources of income of which the public
servant, the public servant's spouse, domestic partner, and unemancipated
child have no knowledge, and which meets requirements established by rules of
the board, which shall include provisions regarding the independent authority
and discretion of the trustee, and the trustee's confidential treatment of
information regarding the holdings and sources of income of the trust.



      7.   "Board" means the conflicts of interest board established
by this chapter.



      8.   "Business dealings with the city" means any transaction
with the city involving the sale, purchase, rental, disposition or exchange
of any goods, services, or property, any license, permit, grant or benefit,
and any performance of or litigation with respect to any of the foregoing,
but shall not include any transaction involving a public servant's residence
or any ministerial matter.



      9.   "City" means the city of New York and includes an agency
of the city.



      10.   "Elected official" means a person holding office as
mayor, comptroller, public advocate, borough president or member of the
council.



      11.   "Firm" means sole proprietorship, joint venture,
partnership, corporation and any other form of enterprise, but shall not
include a public benefit corporation, local development corporation or other
similar entity as defined by rule of the board.



      12.   "Interest" means an ownership interest in a firm or a
position with a firm.



      13.   "Law" means state and local law, this charter, and rules
issued pursuant thereto.



      14.   "Member" means a member of the board.



      15.   "Ministerial matter" means an administrative act,
including the issuance of a license, permit or other permission by the city,
which is carried out in a prescribed manner and which does not involve
substantial personal discretion.



      16.   "Ownership interest" means an interest in a firm held by
a public servant, or the public servant's spouse, domestic partner, or
unemancipated child, which exceeds five percent of the firm or an investment
of twenty-five thousand dollars in cash or other form of commitment,
whichever is less, or five percent or twenty-five thousand dollars of the
firm's indebtedness, whichever is less, and any lesser interest in a firm
when the public servant, or the public servant's spouse, domestic partner, or
unemancipated child exercises managerial control or responsibility regarding
any such firm, but shall not include interests held in any pension plan,
deferred compensation plan or mutual fund, the investments of which are not
controlled by the public servant, the public servant's spouse, domestic
partner, or unemancipated child, or in any blind trust which holds or
acquires an ownership interest. The amount of twenty-five thousand dollars
specified herein shall be modified by the board pursuant to subdivision a of
section twenty-six hundred three.



      17.   "Particular matter" means any case, proceeding,
application, request for a ruling or benefit, determination, contract limited
to the duration of the contract as specified therein, investigation, charge,
accusation, arrest, or other similar action which involves a specific party
or parties, including actions leading up to the particular matter; provided
that a particular matter shall not be construed to include the proposal,
consideration, or enactment of local laws or resolutions by the council, or
any action on the budget or text of the zoning resolution.



      18.   "Position" means a position in a firm, such as an
officer, director, trustee, employee, or any management position, or as an
attorney, agent, broker, or consultant to the firm, which does not constitute
an ownership interest in the firm.



      19.   "Public servant" means all officials, officers and
employees of the city, including members of community boards and members of
advisory committees, except unpaid members of advisory committees shall not
be public servants.



      20.   "Regular employee" means all elected officials and
public servants whose primary employment, as defined by rule of the board, is
with the city, but shall not include members of advisory committees or
community boards.



      21.   a.   "Spouse" means a husband or wife of a public
servant who is not legally separated from such public servant.



         b.   "Domestic partner" means persons who have a
registered domestic partnership pursuant to section 3-240 of the
administrative code, a domestic partnership registered in accordance with
executive order number 123, dated August 7, 1989, or a domestic partnership
registered in accordance with executive order number 48, dated January 7,
1993.



      22.   "Supervisory official" means any person having the
authority to control or direct the work of a public servant.



      23.   "Unemancipated child" means any son, daughter, step-son
or step-daughter who is under the age of eighteen, unmarried and living in
the household of the public servant.



Section 2602. Conflicts of interest board.



   a.   There shall be a conflicts of interest board consisting of five
members, appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the council.
The mayor shall designate a chair.



   b.   Members shall be chosen for their independence, integrity,
civic commitment and high ethical standards. No person while a member shall
hold any public office, seek election to any public office, be a public
employee in any jurisdiction, hold any political party office, or appear as a
lobbyist before the city.



   c.   Each member shall serve for a term of six years; provided,
however, that of the three members first appointed, one shall be appointed
for a term to expire on March thirty-first, nineteen hundred ninety, one
shall be appointed for a term to expire on March thirty-first, nineteen
hundred ninety-two and one shall be appointed for a term to expire on March
thirty-first, nineteen hundred ninety-four, and of the remaining members, one
shall be appointed for a term to expire on March thirty first, nineteen
hundred ninety two and one shall be appointed for a term to expire on March
thirty first, nineteen hundred ninety four. If the mayor has not submitted to
the council a nomination for appointment of a successor at least sixty days
prior to the expiration of the term of the member whose term is expiring, the
term of the member in office shall be extended for an additional year and the
term of the successor to such member shall be shortened by an equal amount of
time. If the council fails to act within forty-five days of receipt of such
nomination from the mayor, the nomination shall be deemed to be confirmed. No
member shall serve for more than two consecutive six-year terms. The three
initial nominations by the mayor shall be made by the first day of February,
nineteen hundred eighty-nine, and both later nominations by the mayor shall
be made by the first day of March, nineteen hundred ninety.



   d.   Members shall receive a per diem compensation, no less than the
highest amount paid to an official appointed to a board or commission with
the advice and consent of the council and compensated on a per diem basis,
for each calendar day when performing the work of the board.



   e.   Members of the board shall serve until their successors have
been confirmed. Any vacancy occurring other than by expiration of a term
shall be filled by nomination by the mayor made to the council within sixty
days of the creation of the vacancy, for the unexpired portion of the term of
the member succeeded. If the council fails to act within forty-five days of
receipt of such nomination from the mayor, the nomination shall be deemed to
be confirmed.



   f.   Members may be removed by the mayor for substantial neglect of
duty, gross misconduct in office, inability to discharge the powers or duties
of office or violation of this section, after written notice and opportunity
for a reply.



   g.   The board shall appoint a counsel to serve at its pleasure and
shall employ or retain such other officers, employees and consultants as are
necessary to exercise its powers and fulfill its obligations. The authority
of the counsel shall be defined in writing, provided that neither the
counsel, nor any other officer, employee or consultant of the board shall be
authorized to issue advisory opinions, promulgate rules, issue subpoenas,
issue final determinations of violations of this chapter, or make final
recommendations of or impose penalties. The board may delegate its authority
to issue advisory opinions to the chair.



   h.   The board shall meet at least once a month and at such other
times as the chair may deem necessary. Two members of the board shall
constitute a quorum and all acts of the board shall be by the affirmative
vote of at least two members of the board.



Section 2603. Powers and obligations.



   a.   Rules. The board shall promulgate rules as are necessary to
implement and interpret the provisions of this chapter, consistent with the
goal of providing clear guidance regarding prohibited conduct. The board, by
rule, shall once every four years adjust the dollar amount established in
subdivision sixteen of section twenty-six hundred one of this chapter to
reflect changes in the consumer price index for the metropolitan New York-New
Jersey region published by the United States bureau of labor statistics.



   b.   Training and education.



      1.   The board shall have the responsibility of informing
public servants and assisting their understanding of the conflicts of
interest provisions of this chapter. In fulfilling this responsibility, the
board shall develop educational materials regarding the conflicts of interest
provisions and related interpretive rules and shall develop and administer an
on-going program for the education of public servants regarding the
provisions of this chapter.



      2.   (a)   The board shall make information concerning this
chapter available and known to all public servants. On or before the tenth
day after an individual becomes a public servant, such public servant shall
be provided with a copy of this chapter and shall sign a written statement,
which shall be maintained in his or her personnel file, that such public
servant has received and read and shall conform with the provisions of this
chapter.



         (b)   Each public servant shall undergo training
provided by the board in the provisions of this chapter on or before the
sixtieth day after he or she becomes a public servant, and periodically as
appropriate during the course of his or her city service. Every two years,
each agency shall develop and implement an appropriate agency training plan
in consultation with the board and the mayor's office of operations. Each
agency shall cooperate with the board in order to ensure that all public
servants in the agency receive the training required by this subdivision and
shall maintain records documenting such training and the dates thereof. The
training required by this subdivision may be in person, provided either by
the board itself or by agency personnel working in conjunction with the
board, or through an automated or online training program developed by the
board.



         (c)   The failure of a public servant to receive the
training required by this paragraph, to receive a copy of this chapter, or to
sign the statement required by this paragraph, or the failure of the agency
to maintain the required statement on file or record of training completed,
shall have no effect on the duty of such public servant to comply with this
chapter or on the enforcement of the provisions thereof.



   c.   Advisory opinions.



      1.   The board shall render advisory opinions with respect to
all matters covered by this chapter. An advisory opinion shall be rendered on
the request of a public servant or a supervisory official of a public servant
and shall apply only to such public servant. The request shall be in such
form as the board may require and shall be signed by the person making the
request. The opinion of the board shall be based on such facts as are
presented in the request or subsequently submitted in a written, signed
document.



      2.   Advisory opinions shall be issued only with respect to
proposed future conduct or action by a public servant. A public servant whose
conduct or action is the subject of an advisory opinion shall not be subject
to penalties or sanctions by virtue of acting or failing to act due to a
reasonable reliance on the opinion, unless material facts were omitted or
misstated in the request for an opinion. The board may amend a previously
issued advisory opinion after giving reasonable notice to the public servant
that it is reconsidering its opinion; provided that such amended advisory
opinion shall apply only to future conduct or action of the public servant.



      3.   The board shall make public its advisory opinions with
such deletions as may be necessary to prevent disclosure of the identity of
any public servant or other involved party. The advisory opinions of the
board shall be indexed by subject matter and cross-indexed by charter section
and rule number and such index shall be maintained on an annual and
cumulative basis.



      4.   All advisory opinions of the board shall include a
statement that the opinion applies only to the requesting public servant or
public servants, and any citation to a previously issued advisory opinion
shall be accompanied by a statement that such previously issued advisory
opinion applies only to the public servant or public servants on whose
request it was originally rendered. Not later than the first day of May
annually, the board shall determine whether any advisory opinion issued in
the prior calendar year has interpretive value in construing the provisions
of this chapter and either (a) establishes a test, standard or criterion; or
(b) the board anticipates will be the subject of future advisory opinion
requests from multiple persons. The board shall make that determination
public in its annual report that is required pursuant to subdivision i of
section 2603 of this chapter, The board shall initiate a rulemaking to adopt
any such opinion, or part of an opinion, so determined.



      5.   For the purposes of this subdivision, public servant
includes a prospective and former public servant, and a supervisory official
includes a supervisory official who shall supervise a prospective public
servant and a supervisory official who supervised a former public servant.



   d.   Financial disclosure.



      1.   All financial disclosure statements required to be
completed and filed by public servants pursuant to state or local law shall
be filed by such public servants with the board.



      2.   The board shall cause each statement filed with it to be
examined to determine if there has been compliance with the applicable law
concerning financial disclosure and to determine if there has been compliance
with or violations of the provisions of this chapter.



      3.   The board shall issue rules concerning the filing of
financial disclosure statements for the purpose of ensuring compliance by the
city and all public servants with the applicable provisions of financial
disclosure law.



   e.   Complaints.



      1.   The board shall receive complaints alleging violations of
this chapter.



      2.   Whenever a written complaint is received by the board, it
shall:



         (a)   dismiss the complaint if it determines that no
further action is required by the board; or



         (b)   refer the complaint to the commissioner of
investigation if further investigation is required for the board to determine
what action is appropriate; or



         (c)   make an initial determination that there is
probable cause to believe that a public servant has violated a provision of
this chapter; or



         (d)   refer an alleged violation of this chapter to the
head of the agency served by the public servant, if the board deems the
violation to be minor or if related disciplinary charges are pending against
the public servant.



      3.   For the purposes of this subdivision, a public servant
includes a former public servant.



   f.   Investigations.



      1.   The board shall have the power to direct the department
of investigation to conduct an investigation of any matter related to the
board's responsibilities under this chapter. The commissioner of
investigation shall, within a reasonable time, investigate any such matter
and submit a confidential written report of factual findings to the board.



      2.   The commissioner of investigation shall make a
confidential report to the board concerning the results of all investigations
which involve or may involve violations of the provisions of this chapter,
whether or not such investigations were made at the request of the board.



   g.   Referral of matters within the board's jurisdiction.



      1.   A public servant or supervisory official of such public
servant may request the board to review and make a determination regarding a
past or ongoing action of such public servant. Such request shall be reviewed
and acted upon by the board in the same manner as a complaint received by the
board under subdivision e of this section.



      2.   Whenever an agency receives a complaint alleging a
violation of this chapter or determines that a violation of this chapter may
have occurred, it shall refer such matter to the board. Such referral shall
be reviewed and acted upon by the board in the same manner as a complaint
received by the board under subdivision e of this section.



      3.   For the purposes of this subdivision, public servant
includes a former public servant, and a supervisory official includes a
supervisory official who supervised a former public servant.



   h.   Hearings.



      1.   If the board makes an initial determination, based on a
complaint, investigation or other information available to the board, that
there is probable cause to believe that the public servant has violated a
provision of this chapter, the board shall notify the public servant of its
determination in writing. The notice shall contain a statement of the facts
upon which the board relied for its determination of probable cause and a
statement of the provisions of law allegedly violated. The board shall also
inform the public servant of the board's procedural rules. Such public
servant shall have a reasonable time to respond, either orally or in writing,
and shall have the right to be represented by counsel or any other person.



      2.   If, after receipt of the public servant's response, the
board determines that there is no probable cause to believe that a violation
has occurred, the board shall dismiss the matter and inform the public
servant in writing of its decision. If, after the consideration of the
response by the public servant, the board determines there remains probable
cause to believe that a violation of the provisions of this chapter has
occurred, the board shall hold or direct a hearing to be held on the record
to determine whether such violation has occurred, or shall refer the matter
to the appropriate agency if the public servant is subject to the
jurisdiction of any state law or collective bargaining agreement which
provides for the conduct of disciplinary proceedings, provided that when such
a matter is referred to an agency, the agency shall consult with the board
before issuing a final decision.



      3.   If the board determines, after a hearing or the
opportunity for a hearing, that a public servant has violated provisions of
this chapter, it shall, after consultation with the head of the agency served
or formerly served by the public servant, or in the case of an agency head,
with the mayor, issue an order either imposing such penalties provided for by
this chapter as it deems appropriate, or recommending such penalties to the
head of the agency served or formerly served by the public servant, or in the
case of an agency head, to the mayor; provided, however, that the board shall
not impose penalties against members of the council, or public servants
employed by the council or by members of the council, but may recommend to
the council such penalties as it deems appropriate. The order shall include
findings of fact and conclusions of law. When a penalty is recommended, the
head of the agency or the council shall report to the board what action was
taken.



      4.   Hearings of the board shall not be public unless
requested by the public servant. The order and the board's findings and
conclusions shall be made public.



      5.   The board shall maintain an index of all persons found to
be in violation of this chapter, by name, office and date of order. The index
and the determinations of probable cause and orders in such cases shall be
made available for public inspection and copying.



      6.   Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit the
appointing officer of a public servant from terminating or otherwise
disciplining such public servant, where such appointing officer is otherwise
authorized to do so; provided, however, that such action by the appointing
officer shall not preclude the board from exercising its powers and duties
under this chapter with respect to the actions of any such public servant.



      7.   For the purposes of this subdivision, the term public
servant shall include a former public servant.



   i.   Annual report. The board shall submit an annual report to the
mayor and the council in accordance with section eleven hundred and six of
this charter. The report shall include a summary of the proceedings and
activities of the board, a description of the education and training
conducted pursuant to the requirements of this chapter, a statistical summary
and evaluation of complaints and referrals received and their disposition,
such legislative and administrative recommendations as the board deems
appropriate, the rules of the board, and the index of opinions and orders of
that year. The report, which shall be made available to the public, shall not
contain information, which, if disclosed, would constitute an unwarranted
invasion of the privacy of a public servant.



   j.   Revision. The board shall review the provisions of this chapter
and shall recommend to the council from time to time such changes or
additions as it may consider appropriate or desirable. Such review and
recommendation shall be made at least once every five years.



   k.   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the records,
reports, memoranda and files of the board shall be confidential and shall not
be subject to public scrutiny.



(Am. L.L. 2018/177, 10/27/2018)



Section 2604. Prohibited interests and conduct.



   a.   Prohibited interests in firms engaged in business dealings with
the city.



      1.   Except as provided in paragraph three below,



         (a)   no public servant shall have an interest in a firm
which such public servant knows is engaged in business dealings with the
agency served by such public servant; provided, however, that, subject to
paragraph one of subdivision b of this section, an appointed member of a
community board shall not be prohibited from having an interest in a firm
which may be affected by an action on a matter before the community or
borough board, and



         (b)   no regular employee shall have an interest in a
firm which such regular employee knows is engaged in business dealings with
the city, except if such interest is in a firm whose shares are publicly
traded, as defined by rule of the board.



      2.   Prior to acquiring or accepting an interest in a firm
whose shares are publicly traded, a public servant may submit a written
request to the head of the agency served by the public servant for a
determination of whether such firm is engaged in business dealings with such
agency. Such determination shall be in writing, shall be rendered
expeditiously and shall be binding on the city and the public servant with
respect to the prohibition of subparagraph a of paragraph one of this
subdivision.



      3.   An individual who, prior to becoming a public servant,
has an ownership interest which would be prohibited by paragraph one above;
or a public servant who has an ownership interest and did not know of a
business dealing which would cause the interest to be one prohibited by
paragraph one above, but has subsequently gained knowledge of such business
dealing; or a public servant who holds an ownership interest which,
subsequent to the public servant's acquisition of the interest, enters into a
business dealing which would cause the ownership interest to be one
prohibited by paragraph one above; or a public servant who, by operation of
law, obtains an ownership interest which would be prohibited by paragraph one
above shall, prior to becoming a public servant or, if already a public
servant, within ten days of knowing of the business dealing, either:



         (a)   divest the ownership interest; or



         (b)   disclose to the board such ownership interest and
comply with its order.



      4.   When an individual or public servant discloses an
interest to the board pursuant to paragraph three of this subdivision, the
board shall issue an order setting forth its determination as to whether or
not such interest, if maintained, would be in conflict with the proper
discharge of the public servant's official duties. In making such
determination, the board shall take into account the nature of the public
servant's official duties, the manner in which the interest may be affected
by any action of the city, and the appearance of conflict to the public. If
the board determines a conflict exists, the board's order shall require
divestiture or such other action as it deems appropriate which may mitigate
such a conflict, taking into account the financial burden of any decision on
the public servant.



      5.   For the purposes of this subdivision, the agency served by



         (a)   an elected official, other than a member of the
council, shall be the executive branch of the city government,



         (b)   a public servant who is a deputy mayor, the
director of the office of management and budget, commissioner of citywide
administrative services, corporation counsel, commissioner of finance,
commissioner of investigation or chair of the city planning commission, or
who serves in the executive branch of city government and is charged with
substantial policy discretion involving city-wide policy as determined by the
board, shall be the executive branch of the city government,



         (c)   a public servant designated by a member of the
board of estimate to act in the place of such member as a member of the board
of estimate, shall include the board of estimate, and



         (d)   a member of the council shall be the legislative
branch of the city government.



      6.   For the purposes of subdivisions a and b of section
twenty-six hundred six, a public servant shall be deemed to know of a
business dealing with the city if such public servant should have known of
such business dealing with the city.



   b.   Prohibited conduct.



      1.   A public servant who has an interest in a firm which is
not prohibited by subdivision a of this section, shall not take any action as
a public servant particularly affecting that interest, except that



         (a)   in the case of an elected official, such action
shall not be prohibited, but the elected official shall disclose the interest
to the conflicts of interest board, and on the official records of the
council or the board of estimate in the case of matters before those bodies,



         (b)   in the case of an appointed community board
member, such action shall not be prohibited, but no member may vote on any
matter before the community or borough board which may result in a personal
and direct economic gain to the member or any person with whom the member is
associated, and



         (c)   in the case of all other public servants, if the
interest is less than ten thousand dollars, such action shall not be
prohibited, but the public servant shall disclose the interest to the board.



      2.   No public servant shall engage in any business,
transaction or private employment, or have any financial or other private
interest, direct or indirect, which is in conflict with the proper discharge
of his or her official duties.



      3.   No public servant shall use or attempt to use his or her
position as a public servant to obtain any financial gain, contract, license,
privilege or other private or personal advantage, direct or indirect, for the
public servant or any person or firm associated with the public servant.



      4.   No public servant shall disclose any confidential
information concerning the property, affairs or government of the city which
is obtained as a result of the official duties of such public servant and
which is not otherwise available to the public, or use any such information
to advance any direct or indirect financial or other private interest of the
public servant or of any other person or firm associated with the public
servant; provided, however, that this shall not prohibit any public servant
from disclosing any information concerning conduct which the public servant
knows or reasonably believes to involve waste, inefficiency, corruption,
criminal activity or conflict of interest.



      5.   No public servant shall accept any valuable gift, as
defined by rule of the board, from any person or firm which such public
servant knows is or intends to become engaged in business dealings with the
city, except that nothing contained herein shall prohibit a public servant
from accepting a gift which is customary on family and social occasions.



      6.   No public servant shall, for compensation, request
private interests before any city agency or appear directly or indirectly on
behalf of private interests in matters involving the city. For a public
servant who is not a regular employee, this prohibition shall apply only to
the agency served by the public servant.



      7.   No public servant shall appear as attorney or counsel
against the interests of the city in any litigation to which the city is a
party, or in any action or proceeding in which the city, or any public
servant of the city, acting in the course of official duties, is a
complainant, provided that this paragraph shall not apply to a public servant
employed by an elected official who appears as attorney or counsel for that
elected official in any litigation, action or proceeding in which the elected
official has standing and authority to participate by virtue of his or her
capacity as an elected official, including any part of a litigation, action
or proceeding prior to or at which standing or authority to participate is
determined. This paragraph shall not in any way be construed to expand or
limit the standing or authority of any elected official to participate in any
litigation, action or proceeding, nor shall it in any way affect the powers
and duties of the corporation counsel. For a public servant who is not a
regular employee, this prohibition shall apply only to the agency served by
the public servant.



      8.   No public servant shall give opinion evidence as a paid
expert against the interests of the city in any civil litigation brought by
or against the city. For a public servant who is not a regular employee, this
prohibition shall apply only to the agency served by the public servant.



      9.   No public servant shall,



         (a)   coerce or attempt to coerce, by intimidation,
threats or otherwise, any public servant to engage in political activities, or



         (b)   request any subordinate public servant to
participate in a political campaign. For purposes of this subparagraph,
participation in a political campaign shall include managing or aiding in the
management of a campaign, soliciting votes or canvassing voters for a
particular candidate or performing any similar acts which are unrelated to
the public servant's duties or responsibilities. Nothing contained herein
shall prohibit a public servant from requesting a subordinate public servant
to speak on behalf of a candidate, or provide information or perform other
similar acts, if such acts are related to matters within the public servant's
duties or responsibilities.



      10.   No public servant shall give or promise to give any
portion of the public servant's compensation, or any money, or valuable thing
to any person in consideration of having been or being nominated, appointed,
elected or employed as a public servant.



      11.   No public servant shall, directly or indirectly,



         (a)   compel, induce or request any person to pay any
political assessment, subscription or contribution, under threat of prejudice
to or promise of or to secure advantage in rank, compensation or other
job-related status or function,



         (b)   pay or promise to pay any political assessment,
subscription or contribution in consideration of having been or being
nominated, elected or employed as such public servant or to secure advantage
in rank, compensation or other job-related status or function, or



         (c)   compel, induce or request any subordinate public
servant to pay any political assessment, subscription or contribution.



      12.   No public servant, other than an elected official, who
is a deputy mayor, or head of an agency or who is charged with substantial
policy discretion as defined by rule of the board, shall directly or
indirectly request any person to make or pay any political assessment,
subscription or contribution for any candidate for an elective office of the
city or for any elected official who is a candidate for any elective office;
provided that nothing contained in this paragraph shall be construed to
prohibit such public servant from speaking on behalf of any such candidate or
elected official at an occasion where a request for a political assessment,
subscription or contribution may be made by others.



      13.   No public servant shall receive compensation except from
the city for performing any official duty or accept or receive any gratuity
from any person whose interests may be affected by the public servant's
official action.



      14.   No public servant shall enter into any business or
financial relationship with another public servant who is a superior or
subordinate of such public servant.



      15.   No elected official, deputy mayor, deputy to a citywide
or boroughwide elected official, head of an agency, or other public servant
who is charged with substantial policy discretion as defined by rule of the
board may be a member of the national or state committee of a political
party, serve as an assembly district leader of a political party or serve as
the chair or as an officer of the county committee or county executive
committee of a political party, except that a member of the council may serve
as an assembly district leader or hold any lesser political office as defined
by rule of the board.



   c.   This section shall not prohibit:



      1.   an elected official from appearing without compensation
before any city agency on behalf of constituents or in the performance of
public official or civic obligations;



      2.   a public servant from accepting or receiving any benefit
or facility which is provided for or made available to citizens or residents,
or classes of citizens or residents, under housing or other general welfare
legislation or in the exercise of the police power;



      3.   a public servant from obtaining a loan from any financial
institution upon terms and conditions available to members of the public;



      4.   any physician, dentist, optometrist, podiatrist,
pharmacist, chiropractor or other person who is eligible to provide services
or supplies under title eleven of article five of the social services law and
is receiving any salary or other compensation from the city treasury, from
providing professional services and supplies to persons who are entitled to
benefits under such title, provided that, in the case of services or supplies
provided by those who perform audit, review or other administrative functions
pursuant to the provisions of such title, the New York state department of
health reviews and approves payment for such services or supplies and
provided further that there is no conflict with their official duties;
nothing in this paragraph shall be construed to authorize payment to such
persons under such title for services or supplies furnished in the course of
their employment by the city;



      5.   any member of the uniformed force of the police
department from being employed in the private security field, provided that
such member has received approval from the police commissioner therefor and
has complied with all rules and regulations promulgated by the police
commissioner relating to such employment;



      6.   a public servant from acting as attorney, agent, broker,
employee, officer, director or consultant for any not-for-profit corporation,
or association, or other such entity which operates on a not-for-profit
basis, interested in business dealings with the city, provided that:



         (a)   such public servant takes no direct or indirect
part in such business dealings;



         (b)   such not-for-profit entity has no direct or
indirect interest in any business dealings with the city agency in which the
public servant is employed and is not subject to supervision, control or
regulation by such agency, except where it is determined by the head of an
agency, or by the mayor where the public servant is an agency head, that such
activity is in furtherance of the purposes and interests of the city;



         (c)   all such activities by such public servant shall
be performed at times during which the public servant is not required to
perform services for the city; and



         (d)   such public servant receives no salary or other
compensation in connection with such activities;



      7.   a public servant, other than elected officials, employees
in the office of property management of the department of housing
preservation and development, employees in the department of citywide
administrative services who are designated by the commissioner of such
department pursuant to this paragraph, and the commissioners, deputy
commissioners, assistant commissioners and others of equivalent ranks in such
departments, or the successors to such departments, from bidding on and
purchasing any city-owned real property at public auction or sealed bid sale,
or from purchasing any city-owned residential building containing six or less
dwelling units through negotiated sale, provided that such public servant, in
the course of city employment, did not participate in decisions or matters
affecting the disposition of the city property to be purchased and has no
such matters under active consideration; The commissioner of citywide
administrative services shall designate all employees of the department of
citywide administrative services whose functions relate to citywide real
property matters to be subject to this paragraph; or



      8.   a public servant from participating in collective
bargaining or from paying union or shop fees or dues or, if such public
servant is a union member, from requesting a subordinate public servant who
is a member of such union to contribute to union political action committees
or other similar entities.



   d.   Post-employment restrictions.



      1.   No public servant shall solicit, negotiate for or accept
any position (i) from which, after leaving city service, the public servant
would be disqualified under this subdivision, or (ii) with any person or firm
who or which is involved in a particular matter with the city, while such
public servant is actively considering, or is directly concerned or
personally participating in such particular matter on behalf of the city.



      2.   No former public servant shall, within a period of one
year after termination of such person's service with the city, appear before
the city agency served by such public servant; provided, however, that
nothing contained herein shall be deemed to prohibit a former public servant
from making communications with the agency served by the public servant which
are incidental to an otherwise permitted appearance in an adjudicative
proceeding before another agency or body, or a court, unless the proceeding
was pending in the agency served during the period of the public servant's
service with that agency. For the purposes of this paragraph, the agency
served by a public servant designated by a member of the board of estimate to
act in the place of such member as a member of the board of estimate, shall
include the board of estimate.



      3.   No elected official, nor the holder of the position of
deputy mayor, director of the office of management and budget, commissioner
of citywide administrative services, corporation counsel, commissioner of
finance, commissioner of investigation or chair of the city planning
commission shall, within a period of one year after termination of such
person's employment with the city, appear before any agency in the branch of
city government served by such person. For the purposes of this paragraph,
the legislative branch of the city consists of the council and the offices of
the council, and the executive branch of the city consists of all other
agencies of the city, including the office of the public advocate.



      4.   No person who has served as a public servant shall
appear, whether paid or unpaid, before the city, or receive compensation for
any services rendered, in relation to any particular matter involving the
same party or parties with respect to which particular matter such person had
participated personally and substantially as a public servant through
decision, approval, recommendation, investigation or other similar activities.



      5.   No public servant shall, after leaving city service,
disclose or use for private advantage any confidential information gained
from public service which is not otherwise made available to the public;
provided, however, that this shall not prohibit any public servant from
disclosing any information concerning conduct which the public servant knows
or reasonably believes to involve waste, inefficiency, corruption, criminal
activity or conflict of interest.



      6.   The prohibitions on negotiating for and having certain
positions after leaving city service, shall not apply to positions with or
representation on behalf of any local, state or federal agency.



      7.   Nothing contained in this subdivision shall prohibit a
former public servant from being associated with or having a position in a
firm which appears before a city agency or from acting in a ministerial
matter regarding business dealings with the city.



   e.   Allowed positions. A public servant or former public servant
may hold or negotiate for a position otherwise prohibited by this section,
where the holding of the position would not be in conflict with the purposes
and interests of the city, if, after written approval by the head of the
agency or agencies involved, the board determines that the position involves
no such conflict. Such findings shall be in writing and made public by the
board.



Section 2605. Reporting.



   No public servant shall attempt to influence the course of any proposed
legislation in the legislative body of the city without publicly disclosing
on the official records of the legislative body the nature and extent of any
direct or indirect financial or other private interest the public servant may
have in such legislation.



Section 2606. Penalties.



   a.   Upon a determination by the board that a violation of section
twenty-six hundred four or twenty-six hundred five of this chapter, involving
a contract work, business, sale or transaction, has occurred, the board shall
have the power, after consultation with the head of the agency involved, or
in the case of an agency head, with the mayor, to render forfeit and void the
transaction in question.



   b.   Upon a determination by the board that a violation of section
twenty-six hundred four or twenty-six hundred five of this chapter has
occurred, the board, after consultation with the head of the agency involved,
or in the case of an agency head, with the mayor, shall have the power to
impose fines of up to twenty-five thousand dollars, and to recommend to the
appointing authority, or person or body charged by law with responsibility
for imposing such penalties, suspension or removal from office or employment.



   b-1.   In addition to the penalties set forth in subdivisions a and
b of this section, the board shall have the power to order payment to the
city of the value of any gain or benefit obtained by the respondent as a
result of the violation in accordance with rules consistent with subdivision
h of section twenty-six hundred three.



   c.   Any person who violates section twenty-six hundred four or
twenty-six hundred five of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and,
on conviction thereof, shall forfeit his or her public office or employment.
Any person who violates paragraph ten of subdivision b of section twenty-six
hundred four, on conviction thereof, shall additionally be forever
disqualified from being elected, appointed or employed in the service of the
city. A public servant must be found to have had actual knowledge of a
business dealing with the city in order to be found guilty under this
subdivision, of a violation of subdivision a of section twenty-six hundred
four of this chapter.



   d.   Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivisions a, b and c of
this section, no penalties shall be imposed for a violation of paragraph two
of subdivision b of section twenty-six hundred four unless such violation
involved conduct identified by rule of the board as prohibited by such
paragraph.



Section 2607. Gifts by lobbyists.



   Complaints made pursuant to subchapter three of chapter two of title
three of the administrative code shall be made, received, investigated and
adjudicated in a manner consistent with investigations and adjudications of
conflicts of interest pursuant to this chapter and chapter thirty-four.



Chapter 69: Community Districts and Coterminality of Services



Section 2700. Declaration of intent.



   It is the intent of this chapter to encourage and facilitate
coterminous community districts and service districts to be used for the
planning of community life within the city, the participation of citizens in
city government within their communities, and the efficient and effective
organization of agencies that deliver municipal services in local communities
and boroughs.



Section 2701. Community districts.



   a.   Each community district shall:



      (1)   Lie within the boundaries of a single borough, except as
provided in subdivisions d and e of this section, and coincide with historic,
geographic and identifiable communities from which the city has developed;



      (2)   Be suitable for the efficient and effective delivery of
those services of municipal agencies required to be made coterminous with the
community districts, pursuant to section two thousand seven hundred four,
including particularly the service and districting requirements of the police
and sanitation departments; and,



      (3)   Be compact and contiguous and have a population of not
more than two hundred fifty thousand persons.



   b.   Community districts shall be as nearly equal in population with
each other as is possible under the criteria in paragraphs one, two and three
of subdivision a of this section.



   c.   With respect to the city's central business district in the
borough of Manhattan from fifty-ninth street south, the council may adopt as
part of the community district map, districts which shall reflect its unique
character as the city's financial, business and entertainment center. In so
doing, the council shall take into consideration the residential, working and
other daytime population as well as the hotel and transient or other
nighttime populations and adhere as nearly as possible to the provisions of
paragraph (3) of subdivision a of this section.



   d.   The community district map for the borough of Manhattan shall
include Roosevelt Island, located in the east river, as part of a community
district in the borough of Manhattan, immediately opposite and to the west of
Roosevelt Island. However, for the purposes of meeting the requirements of
section twenty-seven hundred four relating to coterminality of local
services, section twenty-seven hundred five relating to district service
cabinets and section twenty-seven hundred seven relating to agency budget and
service statements, Roosevelt Island shall be deemed included within a
community district of the borough of Queens immediately opposite and to the
east of Roosevelt Island. The chairperson of the community board of the
Manhattan community district which includes Roosevelt Island, or his or her
designee, shall be a member of the district service cabinet of each of the
community districts in which Roosevelt Island is included in the respective
boroughs.



   e.   The community district map for the borough of the Bronx shall
include that portion of the borough of Manhattan which lies north of the
Harlem River.



Section 2702. Preparation and adoption of map.



   a.    The map of community districts in effect as of the seventh day
of November, nineteen hundred eighty-nine shall be continued until modified
pursuant to this section. Not later than the first day of May nineteen
hundred ninety-four and every tenth year thereafter, the mayor shall, and at
such other times as the mayor deems appropriate, the mayor may, prepare and
present to the council a report reviewing the community district map then in
force and presenting such recommendations for changes in the map as the mayor
deems appropriate. Such review shall consider shifts in population shown in
the most recent decennial census that may require adjustments in the
community district map to conform to the criteria in section twenty-seven
hundred one. Such review shall also consider whether reducing the size of any
community district would provide more efficient and effective service
delivery within the district or districts involved. If the mayor's
recommendations for changes in the map would produce a community district
with a population below seventy-five thousand persons, the mayor may consider
whether partial suspension of coterminality within the district is likely to
provide more efficient or effective service delivery of one or more of the
services for which coterminality is required, and may recommend that
coterminality for one or more designated services within the community
district and any adjacent district be suspended. The mayor's recommendations
for changes shall be referred to as the preliminary revision of the community
district map.



   b.   The borough presidents, city planning commission, community
boards and other civic, community and neighborhood groups and associations
shall be consulted and their recommendations considered in the preparation of
the preliminary revision of the community district map.



   c.   The mayor shall publish the preliminary revision of the
community district map in the City Record and in each borough of the city and
shall, jointly with the borough president, conduct one or more public
hearings on it in each borough of the city. Within sixty days after the last
such hearing, the mayor shall submit to the council such preliminary
revisions of the community district map as he or she deems appropriate.



   d.   The council shall conduct public hearings on the preliminary
revision of the community district map submitted by the mayor and it shall,
by resolution, within one hundred twenty days of such submission, adopt,
adopt with modifications, or disapprove the map as submitted. If the council
adopts the proposed map without modifications, or if the mayor concurs in any
modifications adopted by the council, the new map shall be effective as of
the date specified in the mayor's proposal or in the modifications adopted by
the council and concurred in by the mayor. If the council disapproves the map
as submitted by the mayor, or if the council fails to act within the one
hundred twenty day period, or if the mayor does not concur in any
modifications adopted by the council, the community district map then in
force shall remain in effect.



Section 2703. Modification and review.



Editor's note: bracketed out of law at General Election, November 7, 1989.



Section 2704. Coterminality of local services.



   a.   The head of each agency responsible for one or more of the
services listed below shall organize the local service delivery districts of
such agency as follows:



      (1)   To be coterminous with each of the community districts:
local parks services; local recreation services; street cleaning and refuse
collection services; the patrol services of the police department; and social
services, including community services, community development, youth
services, child development, and special services for children; and,



      (2)   To be coterminous with one or more community districts
or aggregates of them: housing code enforcement, highway and street
maintenance and repair, sewer maintenance and repair, and health services,
other than municipal hospitals.



   b.   Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivision a, the
requirement that patrol services of the police department be coterminous with
each of the community districts in any borough shall not apply to any
community district where the mayor, after consultation with the police
commissioner, shall determine that establishment of such coterminality would
be inconsistent with the most effective delivery of such services. The mayor
shall promptly notify the council of any such determination, and the council
may, by majority vote, disapprove such determination with respect to any
community district within sixty days after the first stated meeting of the
council following the receipt of such notice. If the council shall disapprove
such determination with respect to any community district, the police
commissioner shall organize patrol services to be coterminous with such
district within ninety days of such disapproval.



   c.   The council, by resolution subject to the approval of the
mayor, or the mayor by executive order, may direct that city services in
addition to those specified in subdivision a of this section be made
coterminous with one or more community districts or aggregates of them.



   d.   The head of each agency whose local service delivery districts
are not required to be coterminous with community districts pursuant to
subdivision a or c of this section shall organize the local service delivery
districts of the agency to coincide as closely as possible to the boundaries
of the community districts.



   e.   For purposes of this section, coterminality of services shall
mean that the boundaries of the local service districts of each agency
service listed in subdivision a or required to be made coterminous pursuant
to subdivision c shall coincide with the boundaries of community districts.



   f.   The head of each agency responsible for one or more of the
services listed in subdivision a or required to be made coterminous pursuant
to subdivision c shall: (1) assign to each such local service district at
least one official with managerial responsibilities involving the exercise of
independent judgment in the scheduling, allocation and assignment of
personnel and equipment and the evaluation of performance or the management
and planning of programs; each such official shall have operating or line
authority over agency programs, personnel and facilities within the local
service district; (2) assign to each borough at least one borough
commissioner, or official with an equivalent title, who shall have line
authority over agency programs, personnel and facilities within the borough
related to such services; such official shall consult regularly with the
borough president and shall be a member of the borough service cabinet
established pursuant to section twenty-seven hundred six of the charter; and
(3) publish semi-annually in the City Record and make available to interested
parties a list, by community district and borough, of the name, title, office
mailing address, and office telephone number of the officials appointed
pursuant to paragraphs one and two of this subdivision and to subdivision a
of section twenty-seven hundred six.



   g.   The head of any agency may assign or reallocate personnel,
equipment or other resources outside a community district to meet emergency
needs, special situations, or temporary conditions.



   h.   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit any agency from
maintaining sub-districts within a community district for purposes of
efficient and effective service delivery so long as the combined
sub-districts shall coincide with the boundaries of the community district.
Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the establishment of any
special district authorized pursuant to federal, state or local law, the
boundaries of which do not coincide with the boundaries of a community
district.



   i.   Each borough president may publish an annual report evaluating
the delivery, within the borough, of the services which are listed in
subdivision a, or are required to be made coterminous pursuant to subdivision
c, of this section.



   j.   On or before the first day of December, nineteen hundred
ninety, the mayor shall appoint a task force on service delivery, consisting
of no more than ten members, to review the requirements of subdivision a, c,
and f of this section. Such task force shall include members appointed upon
the recommendations of the council, comptroller, public advocate, and borough
presidents. The membership of the task force shall include, but not be
limited to community board members, district managers, and representatives of
the agencies subject to the requirements of this section. On or before the
first day of December, nineteen hundred ninety-two, the task force shall
submit a report to the mayor and council summarizing its conclusions and
presenting such recommendations for changes in the list of services made
coterminous pursuant to subdivisions a or c, and in the requirements for such
services contained in subdivision f, as the task force deems appropriate.



   k.   The mayor shall report biennially to the council on the
implementation of the requirements of this section. Such report shall
include: (1) an evaluation of the quality of the services delivered to
community districts pursuant to subdivisions a and c of this section during
the preceding two fiscal years, (2) a review of the agencies' implementation
of subdivisions d and f of this section, and of subdivision a of section
twenty-seven hundred six, and (3) any recommendations for changes in the
services listed or in the requirements for those services which the mayor
deems appropriate.



Section 2705. District service cabinet.



   a.   There shall be a district service cabinet within each community
district established pursuant to this chapter. The members of the district
service cabinet shall include:



      (1)   The agency officials designated pursuant to paragraph
one of subdivision f of section twenty-seven hundred four;



      (2)   Representatives of other agencies that provide local
services on a regular basis in the community district, who shall be the
ranking line official assigned to the district;



      (3)   Each council member whose district comprises all or part
of the community district;



      (4)   A representative of the department of city planning
designated by director of city planning;



      (5)   The district manager appointed pursuant to subdivision f
of section twenty-eight hundred; and,



      (6)   The chairperson of the community board for the community
district or his or her representative.



   b.   Each district service cabinet shall:



      (1)   Coordinate service functions and programs of the
agencies that deliver services in the community district;



      (2)   consider interagency problems and impediments to the
effective and economic delivery of services in the district;



      (3)   Plan and recommend joint programs to meet the needs and
priorities of community districts and their residents;



      (4)   Consult with residents of the community district and
their representatives about local service problems and activities; and



      (5)   Keep a public record of its activities and transactions,
including minutes of its meetings.



Section 2706. Borough agency managers and borough service cabinets.



   a.   The head of each agency delivering services in the boroughs
shall designate one or more senior officials of the agency with line
authority as borough representatives of the agency with such coordinative or
other duties and responsibilities as the head of the agency may specify in a
written statement filed in the agency and with the director of operations and
the appropriate borough president.



   b.   There shall be a borough service cabinet within each borough
whose members shall include the borough representatives designated pursuant
to subdivision a of this section, and the borough president, who shall be the
chairperson. Each borough service cabinet shall:



      (1)   Coordinate at the borough level service delivery
functions and programs of agencies that provide services in the borough;



      (2)   Consider interagency problems and impediments to the
effective and economic delivery of services in the borough;



      (3)   Plan and develop programs addressed to the needs and
priorities of the borough and its residents; and



      (4)   Consult with residents of the borough and
representatives of the community boards about service problems and activities.



      (5)   Keep a public record of its activities and transactions,
including minutes of its meetings.



Section 2707. Agency budgets and service statements.



   a.   Each agency with service districts within the community
districts and boroughs shall prepare annually a statement of its service
objectives, priorities, programs and projected activities within each
community district and each borough for the new fiscal year, if requested by
the respective community board or borough board.



   b.   In preparing such statements for community districts the
agencies shall consult with the respective district service cabinets and
community boards. In preparing such statements for the borough, the agencies
shall consult with the borough service cabinet and borough board. The
statements shall be filed no later than the fifteenth day of August with the
mayor, council, borough president, community board and borough board.



   c.   By no later than four months after the end of the fiscal year,
each agency with service districts within the community districts and
boroughs shall report to the respective community and borough boards the
amount of expenditures within each service district for each unit of
appropriation for the preceding year.



Section 2708. Agency information.



   Each agency with service districts within the community districts and
boroughs shall make available to each community board and borough board and
to the respective borough presidents current information on its operations
and programs within each community district and borough.



Chapter 70: City Government In the Community



Section 2800. Community boards.



   a.   For each community district created pursuant to chapter
sixty-nine there shall be a community board which shall consist of (1) not
more than fifty persons appointed by the borough president, at least one-half
of whom shall be appointed from nominees of the council members elected from
council districts which include any part of the community district, and (2)
all such council members as non-voting members. The number of members
appointed on the nomination of each such council member shall be proportional
to the share of the district population represented by such council member.
The city planning commission, after each council redistricting pursuant to
chapter two-A, and after each community redistricting pursuant to section
twenty-seven hundred two, shall determine the proportion of the community
district's population represented by each council member. Copies of such
determinations shall be filed with the appropriate borough president,
community board, and council member. Members appointed to community boards
shall be appointed to serve staggered terms of two years. One-half of the
members appointed to any community board shall serve for a term of two years
beginning on the first day of April in each odd-numbered year in which they
take office and one half of the members appointed to any community board
shall serve for a term of two years beginning on the first day of April in
each even-numbered year in which they take office. Members shall serve until
their successors are appointed but no member may serve for more than sixty
days after the expiration of his or her original term unless reappointed by
the borough president, and provided further that no person shall be eligible
to be appointed as a community board member if that person has previously
held such appointment for four or more consecutive full terms that commenced
on or after April 1, 2019, unless one full term or more has elapsed since
that person last held such office; provided however, that in the case of a
community board member appointed or re-appointed for a term that commenced on
April 1, 2020, the borough president may appoint such member for up to five
consecutive terms commencing on such date. Not more than twenty-five percent
of the appointed members shall be city employees. No more than two members
shall be less than eighteen years of age. No person shall be appointed to or
remain as a member of the board who does not have a residence, business,
professional or other significant interest in the district. The borough
president shall assure adequate representation from the different geographic
sections and neighborhoods within the community district. In making such
appointments, the borough president shall consider whether the aggregate of
appointments fairly represents all segments of the community. The borough
president shall seek out persons of diverse backgrounds, including with
regard to race, ethnicity, gender, age, disability status, sexual
orientation, language, and other characteristics the borough president deems
relevant to promoting diversity and inclusion of under-represented groups and
communities within community boards, to apply for appointment. Community
boards, civic groups and other community groups and neighborhood associations
may submit nominations to the borough president and to council members.



   b.   An appointed member may be removed from a community board for
cause, which shall include substantial nonattendance at board or committee
meetings over a period of six months, by the borough president or by a
majority vote of the community board. Vacancies among the appointed members
shall be filled promptly upon the occurrence of the vacancy by the borough
president for the remainder of the unexpired term in the same manner as
regular appointments.



   c.   Members of community boards shall serve as such without
compensation but shall be reimbursed for actual and necessary out-of-pocket
expenses in connection with attendance at regularly scheduled meetings of the
community board.



   d.   Each community board shall:



      (1)   Consider the needs of the district which it serves;



      (2)   Cooperate with, consult, assist and advise any public
officer, agency, local administrators of agencies, legislative body, or the
borough president with respect to any matter relating to the welfare of the
district and its residents;



      (3)   At its discretion hold public or private hearings or
investigations with respect to any matter relating to the welfare of the
district and its residents, but the board shall take action only at a meeting
open to the public;



      (4)   Assist city departments and agencies in communicating
with and transmitting information to the people of the district;



      (5)   Cooperate with the boards of other districts with
respect to matters of common concern;



      (6)   Render an annual report to the mayor, the council and
the borough board within three months of the end of each year and such other
reports to the mayor or the borough board as they shall require (such reports
or summaries thereof to be published in the City Record);



      (7)   Elect its own officers; adopt, and make available for
reasonable public inspection, by-laws and statements of the duties assigned
by the board to its district manager and other professional staff appointed
pursuant to subdivision f of this section; and keep a public record of its
activities and transactions, including minutes of its meetings, majority and
minority reports, and all documents the board is required by law to review,
which shall be made available, in accordance with law, to elected officials
upon request and for reasonable public inspection;



      (8)   Request the attendance of agency representatives at
meetings of the community board;



      (9)   Prepare comprehensive and special purpose plans for the
growth, improvement and development of the community district;



      (10)   Prepare and submit to the mayor, on or before a date
established by the mayor, an annual statement of community district needs,
including a brief description of the district, the board's assessment of its
current and probable future needs, and its recommendations for programs,
projects, or activities to meet those needs;



      (11)   Consult with agencies on the capital needs of the
district, review departmental estimates, hold public hearings on such needs
and estimates and prepare and submit to the mayor capital budget priorities
for the next fiscal year and the three succeeding fiscal years;



      (12)   Conduct public hearings and submit recommendations and
priorities to the mayor, the council and the city planning commission on the
allocation and use within the district of funds earmarked for community
development activities under city, state or federal programs;



      (13)   Consult with agencies on the program needs of the
community district to be funded from the expense budget, review departmental
estimates, hold public hearings on such needs and estimates, and prepare and
submit to the mayor expense budget priorities for the next fiscal year;



      (14)   Assist in the planning of individual capital projects
funded in the capital budget to be located in the community district and
review scopes of projects and designs for each capital project provided,
however, that such review shall be completed within thirty days after receipt
of such scopes or designs;



      (15)   Evaluate the progress of capital projects within the
community district based on status reports to be furnished to the board;



      (16)   Be authorized to assign a representative to attend any
meeting held by a city agency to determine, in advance of drafting, the form
and content of any environmental impact statement required by law for a
proposal or application for a project in such board's district;



      (17)   Exercise the initial review of applications and
proposals of public agencies and private entities for the use, development or
improvement of land located in the community district, including the conduct
of a public hearing and the preparation and submission to the city planning
commission of a written recommendation;



      (18)   Assist agencies in the preparation of service
statements of agency objectives, priorities, programs and projected
activities within the community district and review such statements;



      (19)   Evaluate the quality and quantity of services provided
by agencies within the community district;



      (20)   Within budgetary appropriations for such purposes,
disseminate information about city services and programs, process complaints,
requests, and inquiries of residents of the community district; and



      (21)   Conduct substantial public outreach, including
identifying the organizations active in the community district, maintaining a
list of the names and mailing addresses of such community organizations, and
making such names and, with the consent of the organization, mailing
addresses available to the public upon request; and



      (22)   With assistance and support from the department of
information technology and telecommunications, maintain a website that
provides adequate public notice of upcoming meetings, minutes from past
meetings for the past twelve months, and contact information for the board.



   e.   Each agency shall furnish promptly to each community board on
request any information or assistance necessary for the board's work. Each
agency shall also report periodically to each board on its service activities
programs and operations within the community district.



   f.   Each community board, within the budgetary appropriations
therefor, shall appoint a district manager and shall be authorized to utilize
the services of such other professional staff and consultants, including
planners and other experts, as it may deem appropriate, all of whom shall
serve at the pleasure of the community board and shall provide the board with
the staff support and technical assistance it requires to fulfill the duties
assigned to it by this charter or other law. The district manager shall (1)
have responsibility for processing service complaints, (2) preside at
meetings of the district service cabinet and (3) perform such other duties as
are assigned by the community board in accordance with the statement of
duties required by paragraph seven of subdivision d of this section. One of
the board members shall be elected by the other members to serve as
chairperson. The chairperson shall use no title other than chair or
chairperson of the community board and the other members shall use no title
other than member of the community board or community board member, except
that any member who is elected or appointed to an official position on the
board, including but not limited to, vice-chairperson, secretary, treasurer,
or chair of a committee or subcommittee of the board shall be allowed to use
such title when acting in such capacity. The department of investigation
shall investigate any allegations concerning the misuse of a community board
title and shall report its findings to the mayor, the council and the borough
president in whose borough the community board is located. The knowing and
intentional use of an improper title by any member of a community board shall
be punishable by a civil penalty of not less than one hundred dollars nor
more than two hundred and fifty dollars for every infraction thereof. The
chairperson of the community board or his or her representative shall be a
member of the district service cabinet. A member of a community board shall
be eligible for appointment to the position of district manager provided that
such member does not participate in any manner in the selection of the
district manager by the board and resigns as a member of any board prior to
or upon assuming the duties of district manager.



   g.   Each community board may employ such other assistants as it may
require within budgeted appropriations for such purposes or funds contributed
for such purpose. Any funds appropriated by the city to enable the community
boards to conduct their duties and responsibilities pursuant to this chapter
shall be allocated directly to each board subject to the terms and conditions
of such appropriations. The basic budget appropriation for the personal
service and other than personal service needs of each community board shall
not include rent. Within reasonable limits appropriate to each board's
location, rent shall be separately appropriated for the board.



   h.   Except during the months of July and August, each community
board shall meet at least once each month within the community district and
conduct at least one public hearing each month. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, a community board shall be required to meet for purposes of
reviewing the scope or design of a capital project located within such
community board's district when such scope or design is presented to the
community board. Such review shall be completed within thirty days after
receipt of such scope or design. Each board shall give adequate public notice
of its meetings and hearings and shall make such meetings and hearings
available for broadcasting and cablecasting. At each public meeting, the
board shall set aside time to hear from the public. The borough president
shall provide each board with a meeting place if requested by the board.



   i.   Each community board may create committees on matters relating
to its duties and responsibilities. It may include on such committees persons
with a residence or significant interest in the community who are not members
of the board, but each such committee shall have a member of the board as its
chairperson. Except as otherwise provided by law, meetings of such committees
shall be open to the public.



(Am. L.L. 2018/211, 12/3/2018, eff. 1/1/2019)



Section 2801. Actions of community boards.



   a.   A majority of the appointed members of any community board
shall constitute a quorum of such board.



   b.   Whenever any act is authorized to be done or any determination
or decision made by any community board, the act, determination or decision
of the majority of the members present entitled to vote during the presence
of a quorum, shall be held to be the act, determination or decision of such
board.



Chapter 71: Department of Transportation



Section 2901. Department; commissioner.



   There shall be a department of transportation, the head of which shall
be the commissioner of transportation.



Section 2902. Deputies.



   The commissioner may appoint three deputies, one of whom shall be in
charge of highway operations and be a licensed professional engineer in good
standing under the education law.



Section 2903. Powers and duties of the commissioner.



   Except as otherwise provided by law, the commissioner shall have
control over and be responsible for all those functions and operations of the
city relating to transportation including, without limitation, the following:



      a.   Parking and traffic operations. The commissioner shall:



         (1)   make such rules and regulations for the conduct of
vehicular and pedestrian traffic in the streets, squares, avenues, highways
and parkways of the city as may be necessary. The violation of such rules and
regulations shall be a traffic infraction triable by a judge of the criminal
court of the city of New York and, except as otherwise provided by law,
punishable by not more than fifteen days' imprisonment, or by a fine of not
more than fifty dollars, or both, and may also be adjudicated pursuant to
title nineteen of the administrative code or pursuant to articles 2-A and 2-B
of the vehicle and traffic law. The police commissioner may, in an emergency,
suspend for a period of forty-eight hours the provisions of any such rule or
regulation and shall immediately notify the commissioner of such suspension.
In order to expedite the movement of traffic or to safeguard pedestrians or
property, a police officer or authorized employee of the transportation
department may order a person to disregard any traffic signal or any such
rule or regulation;



         (2)   establish, determine, control, install and
maintain the design, type, size and location of any and all signs, signals,
marking, and similar devices indicating the names of the streets and other
public places and for guiding, directing or otherwise regulating and
controlling vehicular and pedestrian traffic in the streets, squares, parks,
parkways, highways, roads, alleys, marginal streets, bridges and other public
ways of the city;



         (3)   make recommendations to the mayor as to the design
and location of highway lighting devices, poles and fixtures, and the type of
intensity of illumination of streets and highways;



         (4)   prepare and submit to the mayor a proposed
comprehensive city traffic plan;



         (5)   collect and compile traffic data and prepare
engineering studies and surveys in regard to vehicular and pedestrian traffic;



         (6)   prepare and submit to the mayor detailed reports
in regard to traffic conditions in the city;



         (7)   make recommendations to the mayor in regard to
methods of ameliorating traffic conditions which adversely affect the welfare
of the city and which cannot be remedied by traffic rules and regulations;



         (8)   submit to the mayor from time to time for
consideration and forwarding to appropriate city agencies, specific proposals
for amendment of any resolutions, rules, or regulations of any city agency
which affect traffic conditions in the city, and proposed legislation which
may be necessary to implement and effectuate such proposals;



         (9)   prepare and submit to the mayor, for consideration
and forwarding to the council, the city planning commission and to other
agencies of the city, recommendations and proposals for the improvement of
existing streets, street widening and location of new streets, avenues,
highways and parkways; the location and design of parking garages and parking
areas; the establishment of public parking garages and parking areas; the
location, type and design of off-street loading and unloading and parking
facilities; and other matters relating to traffic control;



         (10)   coordinate the efforts of and consider the
reports, recommendations and suggestions of public and private agencies and
civic groups in regard to traffic conditions and traffic control in the city;



         (11)   prepare analyses of traffic accidents with a view
to determining their causes and means for their prevention;



         (12)   carry on educational activities for the purpose
of promoting traffic safety and free movement of vehicular and pedestrian
traffic in the city;



         (13)   establish parking meter zones, determine the
design, type, size, location and use of parking meters and fix the fees for
parking in parking areas and public parking garages except that regulations
pertaining to the use of parking meter zones shall not apply to vehicles
operated by disabled persons duly displaying special vehicle identification
cards issued by the commissioner other than at those periods of time when "no
standing" restrictions are in effect in the metered zones. The parking fees
and fines and penalties for violation of parking rules so collected shall be
paid into a special fund to be known as the "traffic improvement fund." The
revenues of such fund, upon authorization by the council, shall be used for
the payment of all costs of purchase, rental, engineering, installation,
operation, maintenance and repair of parking meters, for the collection of
coins, for the enforcement of rules and regulations pertaining to vehicular
parking, the collections of fines and penalties for violation of such rules
and regulations, and for the payment of interest on, amortization of, or
payment of any indebtedness contracted by the city in connection with the
installation, operation and maintenance of parking meters. Any revenues
remaining after such payments are made shall be used for capital and other
expenditures to ameliorate traffic conditions which adversely affect the
welfare of the city;



         (13-a)   in conjunction with the commissioner of finance
and with any other city agency, enter into at least one agreement with a
financing agency or card issuer to provide for the acceptance by the city of
credit cards as an alternate means of payment of fines, civil penalties,
charges and fees incurred due to a violation of any law, rule, or regulation
providing for or regulating parking, stopping, standing or trespassing of a
motor vehicle. Such agreement(s) shall be in accordance with the provisions
of the administrative code governing the acceptance by the city of credit
cards as an alternate means of payment of fines, civil penalties, taxes,
fees, rent, rates, charges or other amounts owed by a person to the city.



         (13-b)   notwithstanding the provisions of any other
law, consult with the commissioner of finance or the police commissioner, or
any other appropriate agency head, one or more of whom shall enter into at
least one agreement with a financing agency or card issuer to provide for the
acceptance by the city of at least two major credit cards as an alternate
means of payment of fees or charges required to be paid in order to retrieve
a motor vehicle which has been towed due to a violation of any law, rule, or
regulation providing for or regulating parking, stopping, standing or
trespassing of a motor vehicle. Such agreement(s) shall be in accordance with
the provisions of the administrative code governing the acceptance by the
city of credit cards as an alternate means of payment of fines, civil
penalties, taxes, fees, rent, rates, charges or other amounts owed by a
person to the city. For purposes of this provision, the term "major credit
card" shall mean MasterCard, Visa, American Express or Discover. This
provision shall not be construed to apply to the towing of a vehicle in
satisfaction of a judgment for an outstanding debt owed to the city.



         (14)   enforce laws, rules and regulations concerning
the parking of vehicles and the movement and conduct of vehicular and
pedestrian traffic;



            (a)   Notwithstanding the provisions of any other
law the commissioner shall have the power, concurrently with the police
department, to enforce all laws, rules and regulations prohibiting,
regulating, directing, controlling or restricting both the parking of
vehicles and the movement and conduct of vehicular and pedestrian traffic in
and on all streets, squares, avenues, highways, parkways and public
off-street parking facilities in the city. As used in this section the term
"parking" shall mean and include the parking, standing and stopping of
vehicles at meters and off-street parking metered areas and on any highway in
the city as such terms are defined in the traffic regulations of the city
promulgated pursuant to law; and the term "highway" shall mean and include
any highway or public highway as defined in sections one hundred thirty-four
and sixteen hundred forty-two of the vehicle and traffic law.



            (b)   The commissioner may employ, hire and retain
officers, agents and employees for the purpose of enforcing laws, rules and
regulations prohibiting, regulating, directing, controlling or restricting
the parking of vehicles and the movement and conduct of vehicular and
pedestrian traffic, which officers, agents and employees are hereby
authorized, empowered and designated to issue, make and serve tickets,
summonses and complaints for traffic infractions pursuant to article two-A of
the vehicle and traffic law and such rules and regulations as may be
promulgated thereunder, to issue, make and serve simplified traffic
informations and to issue, make and serve appearance tickets for traffic
infractions, misdemeanors and violations related to the movement and conduct
of vehicular traffic, pursuant to article two-B of the vehicle and traffic
law and title nineteen of the administrative code of the city of New York and
such rules and regulations as may be promulgated thereunder.



         (15)   issue special vehicle identification parking
permits;



            (a)   The commissioner shall issue a special
vehicle identification parking permit to a New York city resident who
requires the use of a private automobile for transportation and to a
non-resident who requires the use of a private automobile for transportation
to a school in which such applicant is enrolled or to a place of employment,
when such person has been certified by the department of health and mental
hygiene or a provider designated by the department or the department of
health and mental hygiene, who shall make such certification in accordance
with standards and guidelines prescribed by the department or the department
of health and mental hygiene, as having a permanent disability seriously
impairing mobility. A permit shall be issued to such person upon his or her
application. A permit shall also be issued to such person upon application
made on such person's behalf by a parent, spouse, domestic partner,* guardian
or other individual having legal responsibility for the administration of
such person's day to day affairs. Any vehicle displaying such permit shall be
used exclusively in connection with parking a vehicle in which the person to
whom it has been issued is being transported or will be transported within a
reasonable period of time. Such permit shall not be transferable and shall be
revoked if used on behalf of any other person. Any abuse by any person to
whom such permit has been issued of any privilege, benefit or consideration
granted pursuant to such permit, shall be sufficient cause for revocation of
said permit.



            (b)   A vehicle bearing such special vehicle
identification permit when parked shall not be deemed in violation of any of
the provisions of the rules and regulations governing parking in the city
except where such a vehicle shall be parked in a bus stop, a taxi-stand,
within fifteen feet of a fire hydrant, a fire zone, a driveway, a crosswalk,
a no stopping zone, a no standing zone, or where such vehicle is double
parked.



            (c)   The name, address and telephone number where
the permittee can be reached shall be written on the reverse side of the
permit, not to be displayed to the public, but to be available for emergency
purposes. Such permit shall also include on the front side thereof, the
license plate number(s) of the vehicle(s) which will be used to transport the
permittee. The commissioner shall allow the permittee to add or delete
license plate number(s) as may be necessary; however, at no time shall the
number of license plate numbers on any given permit exceed ten.



            (d)   Any person to whom a permit has not been
issued, and who shall use a permit issued pursuant to this section for any
purpose other than parking a motor vehicle while transporting a physically
handicapped person, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.



            (e)   Certifications by the department of health
and mental hygiene of applications for special vehicle identification permits
shall be made at those district health offices designated for such purpose by
the commissioner of health and mental hygiene. At least one such district
health office shall be designated in each borough for special vehicle
identification permit certifications. Such certifications shall be available
by appointment at each of said borough health offices, or an alternative
location within the borough as designated by the commissioner by regulation,
on a regular basis.



         (16)   [Repealed.]



         (17)   Establish and publicize a telephone number for
citizen reporting of violations of section 1203-c of the vehicle and traffic
law;



            (a)   The department shall affix a sign indicating
the aforementioned telephone number to all above grade signs, located on city
property which display the international symbol of access;



            (b)   Any person, firm or corporation that is
required by law to install such above grade signs, which display the
international symbol of access, shall affix a sign indicating the
aforementioned telephone number to these signs.



            (c)   Whenever the department shall determine that
such a sign should be installed or affixed, it may order the owner of the
property to perform such work. Such order shall specify the work to be
performed and shall fix a reasonable time for compliance. The department
shall, by appropriate regulations, provide for a reinspection by a
departmental inspector, if the owner of the property requests such
reinspection.



            (d)   Upon the owner's failure to comply with such
order or notice within thirty days of service thereof, the department may
perform the work or cause same to be performed, the cost of which, together
with administrative expenses, as determined by the commissioner, but not to
exceed twenty percent of the cost of performance, shall constitute a debt
recoverable from the owner by lien on the property affected or otherwise.
Upon entry by the city collector, in the book in which such charges are to be
entered, of the amount definitely computed as a statement of account by the
department, such debt shall become a lien prior to all liens or encumbrances
on such property, other than taxes. An owner shall be deemed to have complied
with this subdivision if he or she performs such work as specified in the
order within the time set forth therein.



            (e)   Service of a notice or order upon an owner
pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be made upon such owner or
upon his or her designated managing agent personally or by certified or
registered mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the person whose name
appears on the records of the city collector as being the owner of the
premises. If the records of the city collector show that a party other than
the owner, has been designated to receive tax bills for such property, the
notice shall be mailed to such party as well as to the owner of record, at
his or her last known address. If the postal service returns the order with a
notation that the owner refused to accept delivery of such notice, it may be
served by ordinary mail and posted in a conspicuous place on the premises.



            (f)   A copy of such notice or order shall also be
filed in the office of the clerk of the county where the property is
situated, together with proof of service thereof.



            (g)   A notice of such account, stating the amount
due and the nature of the charge, shall be mailed by the city collector,
within five days after such entry, to the last known address of the person
whose name appears on the records of the city collector as being the owner or
the agent or as the person designated by the owner to receive tax bills or
where no name appears, to the premises, addressed to either the owner or the
agent.



            (h)   If such charge is not paid within ninety
days from the date of entry, it shall be the duty of the city collector to
charge and receive interest thereon, to be calculated to the date of payment
from the date of entry.



            (i)   Such charge and interest shall be collected
and the lien thereof may be foreclosed in the manner provided by law for the
collection and foreclosure of the lien of taxes, sewer rents, sewer
surcharges and water charges due and payable to the city, and the provisions
of chapter four of title eleven of the code shall apply to such charge and
the interest thereon and the lien thereof.



            (j)   In addition to collecting the charge for the
cost of installation or affixing of such a sign, the city may maintain a
civil action for recovery of such charge against a property owner who is
responsible under this section for such work in the first instance, provided
however, that in the event that the department performs the work without duly
notifying such person in the manner prescribed in subdivision e, the cost to
the city of performing such work shall be prima facie evidence of the
reasonable cost thereof.



         (18)   upon receipt of a complaint in the appropriate
borough office of the department concerning a measurement error, incorrect
property assessment, or that the property qualifies for local law
sixty-seven, the borough office shall notify the property owner, within ten
business days, in writing, where appropriate, that all records will be
reviewed and the results will be sent, if applicable, to the sidewalk
assessment review board within the department for review within thirty days
of receipt of the complaint. The property owner may schedule an appointment
in the appropriate borough office of the department to review that property
owner's records. The appropriate borough office shall notify the property
owner of the determination of the sidewalk assessment review board in writing
within fifteen business days of receiving the determination from the sidewalk
assessment review board. The borough office shall also notify the property
owner in writing that if the property owner is not satisfied with the
determination, of the right to file a notice of claim with the office of the
comptroller as provided by section 19-152.2 of the administrative code of the
city of New York and of the right to file a petition for appeal and commence
a proceeding to review and/or correct the notice of account and/or the
quality of work performed under the direction of the department in the manner
provided by section 19-152.3 of the administrative code of the city of New
York. Such notice shall also include the appropriate claim form to be filed
with the office of the comptroller.



         Upon receipt of complaint in the appropriate borough office
of the department regarding the quality of work, the department shall send an
inspector to investigate the complaint within thirty days. Where appropriate
the department shall notify the property owner in writing of the inspection
date at least five days prior to the inspection date. If the quality of the
work is determined to be poor, the work shall be corrected by the appropriate
contractor within eighteen months of substantial completion. If the property
owner alleges that the subsequent or the corrective work was of poor quality,
or if the inspector determines that no correction is required, the property
owner shall be informed in writing, where appropriate, within ten business
days, by the appropriate borough office of the department of the right to
file a notice of claim with the office of the comptroller as provided in
section 19-152.2 of the administrative code of the city of New York and of
the right to file a petition for appeal and commence a proceeding to review
and/or correct the notice of account and/or the quality of work performed
under the direction of or by the department in the manner provided by section
19-152.3 of the administrative code of the city of New York. Such notice
shall also include the appropriate claim form to be filed with the office of
the comptroller. Upon receipt of a complaint other than a measurement error,
incorrect property assessment, that the property qualifies for local law
sixty-seven or concerning quality of work performed under the direction of or
by the department in the appropriate borough office of the department, the
appropriate borough office shall notify, in writing, where appropriate,
within ten business days, of the right to file a notice of claim with the
office of the comptroller as provided by section 19-152.2 of the
administrative code of the city of New York and of the right to file a
petition for appeal and commence a proceeding to review and/or correct the
notice of account in the manner provided by section 19-152.3 of the
administrative code of the city of New York. Upon request of the owner of
property, the department through the appropriate borough office shall within
fifteen business days provide for the reinspection as provided in section
19-152 of the administrative code of the city of New York. Upon request of
the owner of property, the appropriate borough office shall within fifteen
business days provide for the reinspection as provided in section 19-152 of
the administrative code of the city of New York. The department shall also
post signs in conspicuous places in the borough offices advising the public
of such rights;



      b.   Highway operations. The commissioner shall have charge
and control of the following functions relating to the construction,
maintenance and repair of public roads, streets, highways, parkways, bridges
and tunnels:



         (1)   regulating, grading, curbing, flagging and
guttering of streets, including marginal streets and places, and the laying
of crosswalks;



         (2)   designing, constructing and repairing of public
roads, streets, highways and parkways;



         (3)   paving, repaving, resurfacing and repairing of all
public roads, streets, including marginal streets and places, highways and
parkways and the relaying of all pavement removed for any cause including
cleaning, sweeping, landscaping and maintenance functions for arterial
highways as defined by regulation;



         (4)   filling of sunken lots, fencing of vacant lots,
digging down of lots and licensing of vaults under sidewalks;



         (5)   regulation of the use and transmission of gas,
electricity, pneumatic power and steam for all purposes in, upon, across,
over and under all streets, roads, avenues, parks, public places and public
buildings; regulation of the construction of electric mains, conduits,
conductors and subways in any streets, roads, avenues, parks and public
places and the issuance of permits to builders and others to use or open a
street; and to open the same for the purpose of carrying on the business of
transmitting, conducting, using and selling gas, electricity or steam or for
the service of pneumatic tubes, provided, however, that this subdivision
shall not be construed to grant permission to open or use the streets except
by persons or corporations otherwise duly authorized to carry on business of
the character above specified;



         (6)   construction, alteration and maintenance of all
bridges and tunnels. The commissioner shall issue a report to the mayor, city
council and the people of the city about the condition of all bridges and
tunnels operated and maintained by the department on March first, as of
December thirty-first of the preceding calendar year. The report shall
include a description of all capital and revenue budget funds appropriated
for rehabilitation and maintenance of bridges and tunnels as well as the
program developed by the commission for the maintenance of all bridges and
tunnels in the city of New York;



         (7)   removal of encroachments on public roads, streets,
highways and parkways, with the exception of seasonal horticultural
operations, as defined by regulations to be adopted by the commissioner, to
be executed by the department of parks and recreation, and snow removal and
de-icing operations to be carried out by the department of sanitation;



         (8)   clearing, grubbing, grading, filling or excavating
of vacant lots and other land areas, as provided by law;



         (9)   installation of metal chain link fences or
barriers on overpasses, footbridges, bridges or walkways extending over
highways, roadways, parkways and streets. Every fence or barrier so installed
shall extend a suitable height above the surface level of such overpass,
footbridge, bridge or railing, abutment or curbing thereon or adjacent
thereto;



         (10)   designing, constructing and maintaining a
lighting system for streets, highways, parks and public places in the city.



      c.   Ferries and related facilities. The commissioner shall:



         (1)   maintain and operate the ferries of the city;



         (2)   be responsible for constructing, acquiring,
operating, maintaining or controlling all ferry boats, ferry houses, ferry
terminals and equipment thereof and all wharf property and marginal roads
adjacent to such wharves, ferry houses and terminals necessary for the
operation of the ferries and related facilities, including parking sites; any
ferry and any other such property, including but not limited to, all or part
of such wharf property, may be leased in the same manner as other wharf
property, provided, however, that from and after the sixtieth day next
succeeding the date on which the provisions of this paragraph as hereby
amended take effect, no substantial or general change in the level of
services furnished upon any such ferry facility under the jurisdiction of the
commissioner shall be instituted, allowed or continued except upon not less
than thirty days notice to the city planning commission and the council.
Provided, further that notice of such change shall be conspicuously posted in
a public place at each ferry house and terminal for a continuous period of at
least thirty days in advance of any such change taking effect and in
addition, such notice shall further be published at least once during such
thirty day period in a daily newspaper of general circulation in the city;



         (3)   have charge and control of all marine operations
within the city and the power to regulate public and private ferry operations
originating or terminating within the city;



         (4)   establish tours of ferry facilities and their
related operations as well as tours of the New York harbor at fees to be
established by the commissioner, together with the authority to publicize and
advertise the same;



         (5)   issue permits for the control of television and
photography activities within or upon ferries and related facilities; and



         (6)   construct, operate and maintain marinas and public
boat launching ramps and related facilities of ferry property and collect
fees for the use thereof; such fees to be deposited in a special fund for the
continued maintenance, operation or reconstruction of public marine
facilities.



      d.   Mass transportation facilities. The commissioner shall:



         (1)   prepare or review plans and recommendations with
respect to the nature, location, construction, operation and financing of
roads, highways, bridges, tunnels, subways or other facilities for mass
transportation other than aviation facilities for use in whole or in part
within the city whether or not the funds provided for such facilities are
derived from the city treasury;



         (2)   develop and coordinate planning and programming
for all forms of mass transportation within the city of New York whether or
not said transportation is within the sole operating jurisdiction of the city
of New York; and



         (3)   make recommendations to the mayor, the
metropolitan transportation authority, the New York city transit authority,
the port authority of New York and New Jersey and other city, state and
federal authorities and agencies concerning the mass transit needs of the
city of New York.



Section 2904. Duties and obligations of property owner with respect to
sidewalk flags, fencing of vacant lots and filling of sunken lots or cutting
down of raised lots.



   The owner of any property at his own cost, shall



      (1)   install, reconstruct, repave and repair the sidewalk
flags in front of or abutting such property, including but not limited to the
intersection quadrant for corner property, and



      (2)   fence any vacant lot or lots comprising part or all of
such property and fill any sunken lot or lots comprising part or all of such
property or cut down any raised lot or lots comprising part or all of such
property whenever the transportation department shall so order pursuant to
standards and policies of the transportation department and section 19-152 of
the administrative code of the city of New York. In the event that the owner
fails to comply with the provisions of this section, the transportation
department may provide for the doing of same at the expense of the owner in
the manner to be provided by local law and section 19-152 of the
administrative code of the city of New York.



Section 2905. Right of entry.



   The commissioner or his agent when authorized by him may in accordance
with law enter upon public or private property the purpose of making surveys,
borings or other investigations necessary for the exercise of the powers or
the performance of the duties of the department. Refusal to permit such entry
shall be triable by the judge of the criminal court of the city of New York
and punishable by not more than thirty days' imprisonment or by a fine of not
more than fifty dollars or both.



Section 2906. Improved traffic flow at highway construction sites.



   The commissioner may provide that on any city-sponsored, authorized or
assisted arterial highway construction site, or major repair site that in the
discretion of the commissioner is likely to substantially disrupt traffic,
signs be posted at least one half mile or more prior to the area under
construction or repair warning motorists of the fact that such work is in
progress and, wherever possible, advising of an available alternate route.



Chapter 72: Department of Records and Information Services



Section 3000. Department; commissioner.



   There shall be a department of records and information services which
shall include, but not be limited to, municipal archives, a municipal
reference and research center and municipal records management division. The
head of the department shall be the commissioner, who shall be appointed by
the mayor.



Section 3001. Deputy.



   The commissioner may appoint one deputy.



Section 3002. Technical assistants.



Editor's note: bracketed out of law at General Election, November 8, 1988.



Section 3003. Powers and duties.



   The commissioner:



      1.   shall be the chief archivist of the city and shall advise
the mayor, borough presidents and council on those matters concerning the
preservation of the city's historical documentation;



      2.   shall act as the chief reference and research librarian
for the mayor, borough presidents and council and shall ensure that all
significant research material pertaining to the operations of the city as
well as other municipalities shall be preserved and readily available for use;



      3.   shall act as the chief public records officer for the
mayor, borough presidents and council and shall, except as otherwise provided
by law, establish standards for the proper records management in any agency
or government instrumentality funded in whole or in part from local tax levy
monies, and



      4.   shall have the power to exercise or delegate any of the
functions and duties vested in such commissioner by law, subject to the
provisions of subdivision five of this section.



      5.   In addition to the above duties, the commissioner shall
ensure the city's custody and control of city records as follows:



         a.   Pursuant to an approved records disposition
schedule as set forth in section eleven hundred thirty-three of this charter,
the commissioner shall ensure that the records of any city officer or agency
that are of historical, research, cultural or other important value shall be
delivered directly to the department's municipal archives. Upon delivery, the
department shall begin to review such records and publish a survey of such
records with appropriate specificity, and, to the extent practicable, the
contents of such records. Where the commissioner has certified in writing as
to its necessity, under extraordinary circumstances, such records may be
transferred to an archival establishment to be organized and prepared for
archival preservation, provided that such establishment meets the specific
requirements specified in paragraph b of this subdivision.



         b.   If the commissioner decides that it is necessary to
enter into an agreement or contract with another archival establishment
outside the department, to organize and prepare records for archival
preservation, it may not be with a private entity as defined by this chapter,
and may not be with any entity outside the city. The commissioner shall
include with the agreement or contract a plan for strictly monitoring the
status and progress of the archiving operations. The commissioner shall
devise and publish such plan, which shall include at least the following: (i)
a list of the tasks to be conducted and a timetable for the completion of
each such task; (ii) a description of the resources, staffing and training
dedicated by the archival establishment to carrying out such tasks; (iii)
allowances for direct supervision by department archivists; and (iv) an
agreement by the archival establishment to issue, at a minimum, quarterly
reports of its activities to the commissioner. The commissioner shall also
include with such agreement and publish a schedule, where applicable, for the
municipal archives to send original records to such archival establishment
and to receive such records when processing is completed. To the extent
practicable, such schedule shall take into account that original records
should be sent in a limited and controlled manner and that no new such
original records should be sent until receipt of any previously sent under
such schedule. Any such agreement, contract, plan and schedule must be
approved by the law department for compliance with this subdivision. The
commissioner will at all times remain responsible for the proper handling and
archiving of records, notwithstanding any agreement with an archival
establishment outside the department.



         c.   No agreement provided for in subdivision five of
this section shall be entered into during the term of office of any elected
official of the city with regard to whose records such agreement applies.



         d.   Nothing in this subdivision shall prevent officers
or members of such officer's administration from donating money to the
department's municipal archives or other archival establishment so long as
such officers or members are not involved in the supervision, control or
management of the archival processing pertaining to their respective
administrations.



         e.   Nothing in this subdivision should be construed to
limit access by the public to city records. The department shall be
responsible for granting access to records in accordance with applicable
provisions of law. Additionally, agencies of the city shall have free access
to such records as needed.



Section 3004. Department; duties.



   1.   The department shall operate a municipal archives, the head of
which shall be a professional archivist. The archives shall perform the
following functions:



      a.   develop and promulgate standards, procedures and
techniques with regard to archives management;



      b.   make continuing surveys of existing records to determine
the most suitable methods to be used for the creating, maintaining, storing
and servicing of archival material;



      c.   preserve and receive all city records of historical,
research, cultural or other important value;



      d.   appraise, accession, classify, arrange and make available
for reference all records which come into the possession of the archives and



      e.   establish and maintain an archives depository for the
storage, conservation, processing and servicing of records.



   2.   The department shall operate a municipal reference and research
center, the head of which shall be a professional librarian. The center shall
perform the following functions:



      a.   provide information and assistance to the mayor, the
board of estimate, members of committees thereof and administrative officers
of the city in connection with problems of municipal administration and
proposed legislation;



      b.   provide legislative reference assistance to the council,
its members and committees and maintain, in a legislative reference section,
such records and papers as the council and city clerk may remand to its
custody;



      c.   maintain facilities which shall be open to the public
wherein, subject to such reasonable regulation as may be prescribed, all
books, reports, documents and other materials shall be available for public
inspection;



      d.   ensure that at least one copy of each report, document,
study or publication of the city or any of its administrations, departments,
boards or other agencies shall be available at the center at all times;



      e.   collect, compile and maintain data and information
pertaining to the operation of the city as well as other municipalities,
governmental bodies and public authorities and arrange for the exchange,
sale, purchase and loan of information materials from and with legislative
and research services, libraries and institutions in other municipalities,
governmental bodies and public authorities; and



      f.   ensure that each report, document, study or publication
that is electronically transmitted to the department of records and
information services pursuant to section 1133 of the charter is made
available to the public on or through the website of the department, or its
successor's website, within ten business days of publication, issuance,
release or transmittal to the council or mayor.



   3.   The department shall:



      a.   provide for the distribution of publications of the city,
where such authority is not vested in another city agency, and issue at
regular intervals, no less than quarterly, a bulletin describing its
facilities and resources;



      b.   institute actions in replevin to recover any historical
and/or other documents properly owned by, or originating from, the city of
New York;



      c.   report annually by the thirtieth day of September to the
mayor and city council on the powers and duties herein mentioned including,
but not limited to, the cost of savings effectuated by the department during
the preceding fiscal year. This report shall further include an evaluation of
compliance with the requirements of subdivision a of section 1133 of the
charter.



   4.   The department shall operate a municipal records management
division, the head of which shall be a professional records manager. The
center* shall perform the following functions:



      a.   develop and promulgate standards, procedures and
techniques in relation to records management;



      b.   make continuing surveys of operations relating to records
and recommend improvements in current records management practices, including
the use of space, equipment and materials employed in the creation,
maintenance, storage and servicing of records;



      c.   establish standards for the preparation of schedules for
the disposition of records, providing for the retention of records and
archives of continuing value, and for the prompt and orderly disposal of
records no longer possessing sufficient administrative, legal or fiscal value
to warrant their further retention; and



      d.   establish, maintain and operate facilities for the
storage, processing and servicing of records for all city agencies pending
their deposit in the municipal archives or their disposition in any manner as
may be authorized by law.



Section 3005. Archival review board.



   There shall be in the department an archival review board which shall
consist of five members; two of whom shall be appointed by the speaker, two
of whom shall be appointed by the mayor, and one of whom shall be the
commissioner, who shall serve ex officio as chairperson of the board. At
least one such appointment shall be a professional archivist and at least one
other such appointment shall be a professional historian. The members of the
commission, other than the chair, shall be appointed within 30 days of the
effective date of this section and shall be entitled to reasonable expenses.
All appointed members of the commission shall be residents of the city.
Members shall serve for terms of four years from such date of appointment.
Vacancies in appointed membership of the board shall be filled by appointment
by whosoever was responsible for such original appointment. The board shall
meet once every 90 days or upon the request of any of its members. Any member
of such board shall have complete access, during work hours, to inspect and
review any appraisal, organization, processing or archiving of city records
in the custody of an entity with which an agreement has been entered into for
the purposes specified in subdivision five of section 3003. Such board may
request and receive, from the department, assistance and data as may be
necessary for the proper execution of its powers and duties. Such board shall
render annually to the mayor a report reviewing the archival processing of
any city papers during the year for which the report has been written.



Section 3006. Destruction of other materials.



Editor's note: became Section 1133(c).



Section 3007. Departmental libraries.



   The commissioner shall analyze the needs of each city agency, except
the law department, with respect to the establishment and maintenance of any
library or research facility therein, and make such recommendations as may be
appropriate in the circumstances.



Section 3008. Rules and regulations.



   The commissioner shall promulgate rules and regulations to effectuate
the purposes of this chapter, except that rules and regulations relating to
the disposal of records pursuant to section eleven hundred thirty-three shall
be issued by the commissioner after consultation with the corporation counsel
and the comptroller.



Section 3009. Archives, reference and research advisory board.



   There shall be in the department an archives, reference and research
advisory board which shall consist of fifteen members who shall be appointed
by the mayor and which shall consult with the commissioner with respect to
the functions referred to in subdivisions one and two* of section three
thousand four of this chapter to advise such commissioner in matters at his
or her request and render annually to the mayor a report regarding the
development of municipal archives, reference and research services in the
government and administration of the city.



Section 3010. Municipal archives reference and research fund.



   1.   There is hereby established a municipal archives reference and
research fund, which shall be credited with all sums appropriated therefor,
donations made thereto, and proceeds from the disposition of personal
property which is in the custody of the department and which the commissioner
has determined is not a record which must be retained pursuant to law and is
not necessary for archival, reference, or research purposes. Interest
accruing on principal from all aforementioned sources also shall be credited
to the fund.



   2.   The municipal archives reference and research fund established
by this section shall be used, subject to the approval of the director of
management and budget, by the department for purposes related to its library
and archival research programs including, but not limited to, purchasing and
conserving books and other records, financing lecture series and
commissioning studies and articles.



Section 3011. Definitions.



   As used in this chapter:



      1.   "Archives" means those official records which have been
determined by the department to have sufficient historical or other value to
warrant their continued preservation by the city;



      2.   "Records" means any documents, books, papers,
photographs, sound recordings, machine readable materials or any other
materials, regardless of physical form or characteristics, made or received
pursuant to law or ordinance or in connection with the transaction of
official city business. Library and museum materials made or acquired and
preserved solely for reference or exhibition purposes, extra copies of
documents preserved only for convenience of reference and stocks of
publications are not included within the definition of records as used in
this chapter;



      3.   "Records management" means the planning, controlling,
directing, organizing, training, promoting and other managerial activities
involved in records creation, records maintenance and use and records
disposition, including but not limited to, the management of correspondence,
forms, directives, reports, machine readable records, microfilms information
retrieval, files, mail, vital records, equipment and supplies, office
copiers, word processing and source data automation techniques, records
preservation, records disposal and records centers or other storage
facilities;



      4.   "Records management practices" means any system,
procedure or technique followed with respect to effective records creation,
records maintenance and use and records disposition;



      5.   "Records disposition" means:



         a.   The removal by a city agency, in accordance with
approved records retention schedules, of records no longer necessary for the
conduct of business by such agency through removal methods which may include:



            (1)   the disposal of temporary records by
destruction or donation;



            (2)   the transfer of records to the department,
and



            (3)   the transfer to the department of records
determined to have historical or other sufficient value to warrant continued
preservation and



         b.   the transfer of records from one city agency to any
other city agency;



      6.   "Records creation" means any process involved in
producing any recorded information necessary to conduct the business of a
city agency;



      7.   "Records management division" means an establishment
maintained by the department primarily for the storage, servicing, security
and processing of records which must be preserved for varying periods of time
and need not be retained in office equipment or space and



      8.   "Servicing" means making information in records available
to any city agency for official use or to the public.



      9.   "Private entity" means a for-profit or not-for-profit
corporation, or non-governmental organization, but shall not include the City
and State Universities of New York, public libraries, including the New York
Public Library, and any college or university in the city.



Chapter 73: Department of Employment [Repealed]



 



Chapter 74: Landmarks Preservation Commission



Section 3020. Landmarks preservation commission.



   1.   There shall be a landmarks preservation commission consisting
of eleven members. The membership of such commission shall include at least
three architects, one historian qualified in the field, one city planner or
landscape architect, and one realtor. The membership shall include at least
one resident of each of the five boroughs.



   2.   (a)   The members of the commission shall be appointed by
the mayor for terms of three years, provided that of those members first
taking office, three shall be appointed for one year, four for two years, and
four for three years. Each member shall serve until the appointment and
qualification of his or her successor. The terms of members first taking
office shall commence on the date of their appointment.



      (b)   Before making any appointment of a member who is
required to be an architect, historian or city planner or landscape
architect, the mayor may consult with the fine arts federation of New York
and any other similar organization. In the event of a vacancy occurring
during the term of a member of the commission, the mayor shall make an
interim appointment to fill out the unexpired term of such member, and where
such member is herein required to have specified qualifications, such vacancy
shall be filled by interim appointment of a person having such
qualifications, in the manner herein prescribed.



   3.   The members of the commission other than the chair, shall serve
without compensation, but shall be reimbursed for expenses necessarily
incurred in the performance of their duties.



   4.   The mayor shall designate one of the members of the commission
to be chair and one to be a vice-chair. The chair and vice-chair shall serve
as such, until a successor or successors are designated. The commission shall
appoint an executive director who shall devote full time to his or her
duties. The commission shall submit an annual report on its activities to the
mayor.



   5.   The commission may employ technical experts and such other
employees as may be required to perform its duties, within the appropriations
therefor.



   6.   The commission shall have such powers and duties as shall be
prescribed by law with respect to the establishment and regulation of
landmarks, portions of landmarks, landmark sites, interior landmarks, scenic
landmarks and historic districts.



   7.   In order to provide an opportunity for comment, in advance of
any hearing on a proposed designation of a landmark, landmark site, interior
landmark, scenic landmark or historic district, the commission shall send a
notice of the proposed designation and the hearing to the city planning
commission, all affected community boards and the office of the borough
president in whose borough the property or district is located.



   8.   All landmarks, landmark sites, interior landmarks, scenic
landmarks and historic districts designated by the commission pursuant to any
applicable law shall be in full force and effect from and after the date of
the action of the commission. Within ten days after making a designation, the
commission shall file a copy of such designation with the city planning
commission and the council. Within sixty days after such filing, the city
planning commission shall (a) hold a public hearing on any such designation
of a historic district and (b) shall submit to the council a report with
respect to the relation of any such designation, whether of a historic
district or a landmark, to the zoning resolution, projected public
improvements, and any plans for the development, growth, improvement or
renewal of the area involved. The city planning commission shall include with
any such report its recommendation, if any, for council action with respect
to any such designation of a historic district.



   9.   The council may modify or disapprove by majority vote any
designation of the landmarks preservation commission within one hundred
twenty days after a copy of such designation is filed with the city council
provided that the city planning commission has submitted the report required
above or that sixty days have elapsed since the filing of the designation
with the council. All votes of the council pursuant to this section shall be
filed by the council with the mayor and shall be final unless disapproved by
the mayor within five days of such filing. Any such mayoral disapproval shall
be filed by the mayor with the council and shall be subject to override by a
two-thirds vote of the council within ten days of such filing.



   10.   (a)   There shall be a panel, independent of the
commission, consisting of five members appointed by the mayor with the advice
and consent of the council in accordance with the procedures in section
thirty-one. Such panel shall review appeals from determinations of the
commission denying applications for certificates of appropriateness, based on
the grounds of hardship, to demolish, alter or reconstruct improvements that
are exempt from real property taxes, provided that such appeals may be
brought only with respect to applications made under applicable law on the
grounds of hardship applicable only to tax-exempt properties.



      (b)   Within a reasonable time period, the mayor shall submit
to the council a proposed local law establishing the procedure, including the
standard of review, for reviews by such panel. If such a local law is not
enacted within one year of the effective date of this subdivision, the mayor
shall promptly establish by executive order the procedures for reviews by
such panel. Such panel shall not review appeals from determinations of the
commission until the effective date of such a local law or executive order;
provided, however, that any of the applications described in paragraph a of
this subdivision that are denied by the commission after the first day of
January, nineteen hundred ninety and prior to the effective date of such
local law or executive order may be appealed to such panel during a sixty-day
period commencing on the effective date of such local law or executive order.



      (c)   The provisions of this subdivision shall not be
construed to alter or amend the provisions of chapter three of title
twenty-five of the administrative code and the judicial interpretations
thereof.



      (d)   The failure to appeal to the panel for review of a
determination of the commission described in paragraph a of this subdivision
shall not preclude the commencement of a judicial action or proceeding for
review of such a determination; provided, however, that no such action or
proceeding may be brought during the pendency of an appeal before the panel.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this subdivision, the
commencement of a judicial action or proceeding for review of a determination
of the commission shall preclude the appeal of such a determination to the
panel. Any party, including the commission, aggrieved by a final
determination of the panel may commence a judicial action or proceeding for
review of such determination of the panel.



   11.   In addition to the powers conferred by this chapter, the
commission shall have the powers specifically conferred upon it by chapter
thirty-seven of the charter.



Section 3021. Hardship appeals panel.



   1.   Definitions. For the purposes of this section,



      (a)   "Panel" means the hardship appeals panel established
pursuant to subdivision two of this section.



      (b)   "Commission" means the landmarks preservation commission.



   2.   (a)   There is hereby established the hardship appeals
panel, independent of the commission, to consist of five members appointed by
the mayor with the advice and consent of the council in the manner specified
in section thirty-one of the charter. No more than two members of the panel
shall be residents of the same borough.



      (b)   The term of each member shall be three years, provided,
however, that of the members first appointed on or after the effective date
of this section, two shall be appointed for a term of two years and one shall
be appointed for a term of one year.



      (c)   The mayor shall designate one member to be chair.



      (d)   The members shall serve without compensation but shall
be reimbursed for actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance
of their duties.



   3.   The panel shall review appeals from determinations of the
commission denying applications for certificates of appropriateness, based on
the grounds of hardship, to demolish, alter or reconstruct improvements that
are exempt from real property taxes, provided that such appeals may be
brought only with respect to applications made under applicable law on the
grounds of hardship applicable only to tax-exempt properties. Notwithstanding
the foregoing provision, the panel shall not have jurisdiction to review such
appeals if a judicial proceeding for review of such determination of the
commission has been commenced.



   4.   A proceeding for review pursuant to this section shall be
commenced by filing a notice of appeal and petition. A notice of appeal shall
be filed with the panel and the commission no more than forty-five days after
the date that notice of the determination of the commission is served upon
the appellant. A petition and any supporting memoranda of law shall be filed
with the panel and the commission no later than sixty days after the date on
which the notice of appeal was filed with the panel and the commission. Upon
the filing of a petition, the panel shall obtain from the commission the
record of the proceedings before the commission relating to the matter to be
reviewed. The commission shall have the opportunity to file with the panel
responsive memoranda of law within thirty days after receipt of the petition
and supporting memoranda. Any other submissions to the panel, including reply
memoranda, shall be filed in accordance with a schedule established by the
panel. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, with respect to applications
described in subdivision three of this section that are denied by the
commission after the first day of January, nineteen hundred ninety and prior
the the effective date of this section the notice of appeal and petition
shall be filed with the panel and the commission no more than sixty days
after the effective date of this section.



   5.   The panel shall review the petition, consider the arguments
made in the memoranda submitted to it, afford the parties the opportunity to
present oral argument, and review the record of the commission including the
statements of those who appeared before the commission, the documents in the
record, including materials prepared by members of the commission, staff and
their consultants, the statements of members of the commission and staff in
the record and findings of, and the reasons given by, the commission for its
determination. The panel shall not substitute its own judgment for that of
the commission. It shall not take testimony or consider any evidence that was
not in the record below. If the panel finds that the determination of the
commission has a rational basis supported by substantial evidence in the
record, it shall affirm the determination of the commission; otherwise it
shall reverse the commission's determination and remand the matter to the
commission, which shall then issue a preliminary determination of
insufficient return and take such steps as are provided by law following such
preliminary determination.



   6.   The appellant or the commission may commence a judicial
proceeding for review of a determination of the panel.



   7.   The panel shall render a determination expeditiously. If the
panel does not render a determination within ninety days after the date of
the filing of the petition, the petitioner at his or her option may agree to
an extension of time for such determination or may withdraw his or her
petition. If the petitioner chooses to withdraw the petition, the panel shall
no longer have jurisdiction to hear the appeal and the determination of the
commission described in subdivision three of this section shall be considered
final and shall be subject to judicial review as provided by law.



   8.   Any determination of the panel reversing the commission's
determination and remanding the matter shall be stayed pending the final
resolution of any judicial proceeding for review of the determination of the
panel.



   9.   Nothing in this section shall be construed to affect the
provisions of law and procedures governing determinations of the commission,
including, but not limited to, the nature and conduct of hearings and the
burdens of proof, that are otherwise provided for under chapter three of
title twenty-five of the administrative code and any rules promulgated
thereunder and any judicial interpretations thereof, or to affect the
standards provided in law for judicial review of any determination of the
commission or panel.



   10.   Nothing in this section shall be construed to require a person
aggrieved by a determination of the commission to appeal to the panel prior
to commencing a judicial proceeding for review of such determination.



   11.   The panel may adopt such rules of procedure consistent with
this section as are necessary to carry out the provisions of this section.



Chapter 75: Department of Veterans' Services



Section 3100. Department; commissioner.



   There shall be a department of veterans' services, the head of which
shall be the commissioner of veterans' services. The commissioner may appoint
deputies within available appropriations.



(L.L. 2015/113, 12/10/2015, eff. 4/8/2016)



Section 3101. Definition.



   As used in this chapter, the following term has the following meaning:



      Veteran. The term "veteran" shall mean a person who has served in
the active military service of the United States and who has been released
from such service other than by dishonorable discharge, or who has been
furloughed to the reserve.



(L.L. 2015/113, 12/10/2015, eff. 4/8/2016)



Section 3102. Powers and duties.



   a.   Except as otherwise provided by law, the commissioner shall
have such powers as provided by the director of the state veterans' service
agency and shall have the duty to inform military and naval authorities of
the United States and assist members of the armed forces and veterans, who
are residents of the city, and their families, in relation to: (1) matters
pertaining to educational training and retraining services and facilities,
(2) health, medical and rehabilitation service and facilities, (3) provisions
of federal, state and local laws and regulations affording special rights and
privileges to members of the armed forces and veterans and their families,
(4) employment and re-employment services, and (5) other matters of similar,
related or appropriate nature. The commissioner shall also assist families of
members of the reserve components of the armed forces and the organized
militia ordered into active duty to ensure that they are made aware of and
are receiving all appropriate support available to them. The department also
shall perform such other duties as may be assigned by the state director of
the division of veterans' services.



   b.   The commissioner shall utilize, so far as possible, the
services, commissions, boards, bureaus, institutions and other agencies of
the state and of the political subdivisions thereof and all such officers and
agencies shall cooperate with and extend such services and facilities to the
department as it may require.



(L.L. 2015/113, 12/10/2015, eff. 4/8/2016; Am. 2019 N.Y. Laws Ch. 56,
4/12/2019)



Section 3103. Veterans' advisory board.



   There shall be a veterans' advisory board consisting of eleven members,
all of whom shall be veterans, six of whom shall be appointed by the mayor
and five of whom shall be appointed by the speaker of the council. Of these
eleven appointees, there shall be one representative from each of the five
boroughs of the city of New York. The mayor and the speaker shall each
consider service in conflicts involving members of the United States armed
forces when making such appointments. All members shall serve for a term of
three years and may be removed by the appointing official for cause. Members
of the advisory board shall elect by majority vote one such member to serve
as chairperson and one such member to serve as vice-chairperson, each to
serve in that capacity for one-year terms. In the event of a vacancy on the
advisory board during the term of office of a member by reason of removal,
death, resignation, or otherwise, a successor shall be chosen in the same
manner as the original appointment. A member appointed to fill a vacancy
shall serve for the balance of the unexpired term. The advisory board shall
(i) advise the commissioner on all matters concerning veterans; (ii) hold at
least one meeting open to the public in each borough on an annual basis, with
notice of each public meeting provided in accordance with the public notice
requirements of article 7 of the public officers law except with respect to
those requirements provided in section 31-105 of the administrative code, and
with each public meeting recorded and broadcast in accordance with
subdivision d of section 1063 of the charter; (iii) keep a record of its
deliberations; (iv) determine its own rules of procedure; and (v) submit an
annual report of its activities to the mayor and the council on or before
December 31 of each year. Such annual report should include policy and
legislative recommendations for the department of veterans' services and the
council.



(L.L. 2015/113, 12/10/2015, eff. 4/8/2016)



Chapter 76: Civic Engagement Commission



Section 3200. Civic engagement commission.



There shall be a civic engagement commission, the purpose of which is to
enhance civic participation in order to enhance civic trust and strengthen
democracy in New York city, including through the commission's own
initiatives and partnership with public and private entities related to civic
service, volunteerism. stewardship of public spaces, civic education,
participatory budgeting, participation in community boards, civic
organizations and community groups, and other related activities, and to
support and encourage New Yorkers to meaningfully participate in civic life.



(L.L. 2018/211, 12/3/2018, eff. 4/1/2019)



Section 3201. Membership of the commission.



   a.   The commission shall consist of 15 members. The mayor shall
appoint eight members, one of whom shall be designated by the mayor as its
chair and shall serve as such at the pleasure of the mayor, and provided
further that at least one of the mayor's appointees shall be enrolled in the
political party that, based on the most recent data available as of 30 days
before the initial date of the term for which the member is serving, had the
highest total number of registered voters in the city, and at least one shall
be enrolled in the political party that, based on the most recent data
available as of 30 days before the initial date of the term for which the
member is serving, had the next highest total number of registered voters in
the city. The speaker of the city council shall appoint two members. Each
borough president shall appoint one member. In appointing members to the
commission, the mayor, speaker and borough presidents shall consider
individuals who are representative of, or who have experience working with,
immigrants, limited English proficient individuals, people with disabilities,
students, youth, seniors, veterans, community groups, advocacy groups that
seek to promote transparency and accountability in government or protect
civil rights, and groups or categories of residents that have been
historically underrepresented in or underserved by city government and its
processes.



   b.   The first members, other than the chair, shall be appointed to
serve as follows:



      1.   Three members appointed by the mayor for a term of two
years;



      2.   Four members appointed by the mayor for a term of four
years. Such members shall include at least one member who is enrolled in the
political party that, based on the most recent data available thirty days
before the initial date of the term for which the member is serving, had the
highest total number of registered voters in the city, and at least one
member who is enrolled in the political party that, based on the most recent
data available thirty days before the initial date of the term for which the
member is serving, had the next highest total number of registered voters in
the city;



      3.   One member appointed by the speaker for a term of two
years;



      4.   One member appointed by the speaker for a term of four
years;



      5.   One member appointed by each of the borough presidents
for a term of three years.



The first term shall commence on April 1, 2019. Thereafter, each member other
than the chair shall be appointed by the mayor, the speaker, or a borough
president, according to the original manner of appointment, for a term of
four years. Upon expiration of the term of a member, if the appointing
official shall fail to appoint a member within 120 days of the expiration of
such term, the member whose term has expired shall be deemed appointed for an
additional term of four years. In case of a vacancy, a member shall be
appointed to serve for the remainder of the unexpired term according to the
original manner of appointment of the member whose seat has become vacant.
Each member shall be a resident of the city. No member shall serve as an
officer of a political party, or be a candidate for nomination for election
or election to the office of mayor, public advocate, comptroller, borough
president or member of the city council. Except with respect to the position
of chair, no person shall be ineligible for membership on the commission
because such person holds any other public office, employment or trust, nor
shall any person be made ineligible to hold or forfeit such person's right to
hold any public office, employment or trust by reason of such appointment.



   c.   The chair shall also serve as executive director. The chair and
executive director shall have charge of the organization of the commission's
office and have authority to employ, assign and superintend the duties of
such officers and employees as may be necessary to carry out the provisions
of this chapter. The chair and executive director shall devote his or her
full time to the position and shall be entitled to compensation for the
position.



   d.   The other members of the commission shall not be entitled to
compensation for their service to the commission but shall be compensated for
expenses actually and necessarily incurred in the performance of their
duties, and provided further that a city employee may continue to receive
regular compensation for city employment.



   e.   A majority of the whole number of members of the commission
then in office shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of any business.
The commission shall have power to act by a majority of its members.



(L.L. 2018/211, 12/3/2018, eff. 4/1/2019)



Section 3202. Jurisdiction, powers and duties of the commission.



   a.   The commission shall, subject to appropriation, have the power
and duty to:



      1.   Citywide participatory budgeting. Implement any program
established by the mayor acting in accordance with section 225-a to promote
the participation of residents in identifying and expressing preferences
among recommendations for local projects to be considered for inclusion in
the executive budget. In developing a plan for implementation of such
program, the commission shall:



         (a)   Provide opportunities for public participation
throughout the city;



         (b)   Coordinate with borough presidents, community
boards and other city agencies and elected officials to the extent
practicable, in the development and implementation of such program;



         (c)   Establish a participatory budgeting advisory
committee, which shall provide recommendations to the commission regarding
the development and implementation of such program, which may include
recommendations regarding best practices for outreach and education, use of
technological tools to promote participation by a wide range of residents,
reporting of demographic information, and methods to promote efficiency and
equity in the administration of such program. In selecting the members of
such committee, the commission shall consider whether individuals have
knowledge and experience in the planning and management of city projects or
in participatory budgeting; or are representative of or have experience
working with immigrant communities, limited English proficient individuals,
people with disabilities, youth, students, seniors, veterans, community
groups, or groups or categories of residents that have been historically
underrepresented in or underserved by city government and its processes. Any
action or recommendation of the participatory budgeting advisory committee
shall be solely advisory in nature and shall have no binding effect on the
commission or any other city agency.



         (d)   Establish multiple methods of public
participation, which shall include but need not be limited to public
meetings, online tools and other forms of community involvement;



         (e)   Establish that any resident of New York city at
least 16 years of age shall be eligible for participation in such program
regardless of immigration status, provided that the commission may promulgate
rules establishing a minimum age requirement lower than 16 years and any
restrictions the commission deems appropriate for the protection of minors;



         (f)   In consultation with the mayor's office of
immigrant affairs, the mayor's office for people with disabilities, the
department of youth and community development, the department for the aging,
and the department of veteran services, identify and implement measures,
including but not limited to staff training, community outreach, and language
assistance tools, to promote participation in the program by a wide range of
residents, including non-citizens, members of immigrant communities,
residents under the age of 18 that are eligible to participate in the program
pursuant to this section and the rules of the commission, students, seniors,
veterans, people with disabilities, and limited English proficient
individuals.



      2.   Community partnerships. Develop new initiatives to
support and partner with community-based organizations, institutions and
civic leaders in the public and private sectors in their civic engagement
efforts, which may include, among other activities, leadership skills
development, stewardship of public spaces, youth and student engagement,
civic education, and outreach to seniors, veterans, immigrant communities,
groups or categories of residents that have been historically
underrepresented in or underserved by city government and its processes, and
communities and neighborhoods throughout the city.



      3.   Language access. Develop a plan to consider the language
access needs of limited English proficient individuals in the development and
implementation of the commission's programs and services, consistent with the
requirements of section 23-1102 of the administrative code. Except with
respect to services provided pursuant to paragraph 4 of this subdivision, the
commission shall be deemed a covered agency pursuant to section 23-1101 of
the administrative code.



      4.   Poll site language assistance program.



         (a)   Subject to appropriation and after consultation
with the mayor's office of immigrant affairs and the department of city
planning, establish a program for providing language interpreters at poll
sites throughout New York city for the purpose of facilitating participation
by limited English proficient individuals in voting in elections held in the
city. To the extent practicable, the commission shall consult and coordinate
with the board of elections of the city of New York in the development and
implementation of the program established pursuant to this paragraph.



         (b)   The commission shall establish a language
assistance advisory committee to provide recommendations for the development
and implementation of the program established pursuant to this paragraph and
assist the commission's efforts to promote public education and awareness
regarding the program. To the extent practicable, there shall be at least one
member of the committee with fluency in each of the designated citywide
languages. In selecting the members of such committee, the commission shall
also consider whether individuals have expertise in language accessibility or
experience working with limited English proficient individuals within the
city, and shall seek out individuals from diverse backgrounds. Any action or
recommendation of the language assistance advisory committee shall be solely
advisory in nature and shall have no binding effect on the commission or any
other city agency.



         (c)   On or before January 1, 2020, the commission shall
develop and make available on its website a proposed methodology, or proposed
methodologies, to determine the poll sites and languages covered by such
program, consistent with the following:



            i.   The commission shall determine which poll
sites are likely to have a significant concentration of limited English
proficient speakers of designated citywide languages, as such term is defined
in section 23-1101 of the administrative code, based on neutral criteria,
which shall include consideration of the following information, where
available, provided that the commission shall not be required to include any
particular category of information in its methodology if, after
consideration, it determines that such category should not be included:



               A.   Relevant data from the most recent
American Community Survey from the United States census bureau;



               B.   The locations of poll sites and the
boundaries of election districts;



               C.   Information related to voter turnout;



               D.   Such other information as deemed
appropriate by the commission, which mar include the results of a surname
analysis of registered voters;



            ii.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this
paragraph, the commission shall not provide interpreter assistance in a
language covered by the voting rights act in a jurisdiction where such
language has been determined to be a covered language pursuant to such law;



            iii.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this
paragraph, the commission shall not provide interpreter assistance at a poll
site where the board of elections of the city of New York has stated an
intention to provide the same service in the same language;



            iv.   The commission may make a determination to
provide interpreters in any language that is not deemed a designated city
wide language, as such term is defined in section 23-1101 of the
administrative code, where: (A) the number of limited English proficient
speakers of such language within New York city is greater than the number of
limited English proficient speakers of the lowest ranking designated citywide
language, based on United States census data, as determined by the department
of city planning and the office of the language services coordinator, and (B)
at least one poll site is likely to have a significant concentration of
limited English proficient speakers of such language.



         (d)   On or before April 1. 2020, the commission shall
publish a final methodology to determine the poll sites and languages covered
by such program after accepting public comments for at least 30 days and
conducting at least one public hearing on the methodology proposed pursuant
to subparagraph (c) of this paragraph.



         (e)   Subject to appropriation, the commission shall
implement such program no later than the general election held in 2020.



         (f)   On or before September 1, 2022 and at least every
five years thereafter, the commission shall review the final methodology
established pursuant to subparagraph (d) of this paragraph and the poll sites
and languages covered by such program and, after consultation with the
mayor's office of immigrant affairs and the department of city planning,
shall update such methodology and such poll sites and languages as deemed
appropriate by the commission in accordance with the criteria described in
clauses i through iv of subparagraph (c) of this paragraph, after
consideration of newly available United States census data or other relevant
data, provided that the commission shall also consider the degree to which
interpreter services provided pursuant to this paragraph were utilized at
each covered poll site in previous elections. The commission shall publish
any updates to such methodology or to the poll sites and languages covered by
such program on the commission's website.



         (g)   In consultation with the mayor's office of
immigrant affairs, the commission shall promulgate rules establishing minimum
standards and training requirements for individuals who provide interpreter
assistance pursuant to this paragraph, which shall include at a minimum, a
requirement that such individuals shall comply with all applicable laws,
including prohibitions on electioneering, and shall comply with all lawful
orders from staff of the board of elections of the city of New York.



         (h)   The commission shall develop a plan to notify the
public of the languages and poll sites covered by the program established
pursuant to this paragraph in advance of each election at which such services
will be offered and shall utilize strategies to promote public education and
awareness regarding the program.



         (i)   The commission shall develop a process to monitor
and timely respond to public complaints regarding the program.



         (j)   Any interpreter services performed by the
commission or agent thereof pursuant to this paragraph shall not be construed
to supplant, replace, or satisfy any obligations or responsibilities of the
board of elections of the city of New York.



         (k)   Nothing in this paragraph or the administration or
application thereof shall be construed to create a private right of action on
the part of any person or entity against the city or any agency, official, or
employee thereo;



      5.   Partnerships with city agencies. Conduct programming in
partnership with other city agencies to increase awareness of and access to
city services and public engagement processes, create tools to assist city
agencies in developing and promoting civic engagement initiatives, and
develop strategies to centralize public information about opportunities for
civic engagement in the city and to make such information accessible to all
city residents, including strategies for outreach to groups or categories of
residents that have been historically underrepresented in or underserved by
city government and its processes;



   b.   Reporting. No later than September 30, 2021, and by September
30 of each year thereafter, the commission shall submit to the mayor and the
speaker of the council and shall make available on the commission's website a
report that shall include the following information for the previous fiscal
year, or as otherwise specified:



      1.   With respect to the citywide participatory budgeting
program established pursuant to section 225-a and paragraph 1 of subdivision
a of this section:



         (a)   The number of individuals who participated in the
program, disaggregated by borough, and any voluntarily disclosed demographic
information about participants, as deemed appropriate by the commission,
reported in aggregate and anonymized form;



         (b)   The number of projects selected for
recommendation, disaggregated by borough;



         (c)   A description of the public outreach tools
employed to promote participation in the program;



         (d)   Any recommendations for changes to enhance
participation or other aspects of the program;



         (e)   Such other information that the commission deems
relevant.



      2.   The locations of poll sites at which interpreters were
provided pursuant to paragraph 4 of subdivision a of this section, the
languages provided, and the number of individuals who utilized such language
interpretation services, disaggregated by poll site, as well as any
recommended changes to better serve the needs of limited English proficient
voters; and



      3.   Any other information the commission deems relevant.



   c.   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to limit the
authority or powers of the voter assistance advisory committee, the campaign
finance board or the board of elections of the city of New York or the
enforcement of applicable laws or rules promulgated or enforced by such
agencies.



   d.   Additional powers and duties. Notwithstanding any inconsistent
provision of law, the mayor shall be authorized to assign by executive order
any powers and duties performed by the executive office of the mayor, any
other office of the mayor or any department the head of which is appointed by
the mayor to the civic engagement commission, where such powers and duties
are directly related to the mission of the civic engagement commission as
described in section 3200 or otherwise in this chapter. The mayor may
withdraw or modify any such order at any time.



(L.L. 2018/211, 12/3/2018, eff. 4/1/2019)



Section 3203. Assistance to community boards.



   a.   Subject to appropriation, the civic engagement commission shall
provide assistance and training to community boards, in consultation and
coordination with the department of city planning and other relevant city
agencies and with borough presidents to the extent practicable, including but
not limited to:



      1.   Identifying qualified firms, professional staff members
or consultants to provide urban planning or other technical assistance
related to land use who do not otherwise have an interest in land use
proposals with respect to which they are providing assistance, and
administering a program for providing such services to community boards upon
request. In administering such a program, the commission shall, to the extent
practicable: seek to ensure that available resources are accessible to all
community boards and that such resources are administered in a neutral and
impartial manner; seek to ensure that such resources are provided in a manner
that allows community boards to direct any provider of professional services
in a manner that is consistent with their needs and objectives; and provide a
mechanism for community boards to provide feedback regarding resources
provided pursuant to this paragraph;



      2.   To the extent practicable, in consultation with the
mayor's office of immigrant affairs, identifying and providing services
requested by Community boards to address the needs of limited English
proficient individuals, including but not limited to staff training,
community outreach, and language assistance tools; and



      3.   Developing and providing training and other assistance to
community boards, which may include but need not be limited to assistance in
utilizing technological tools and assistance in developing uniform meeting
procedures.



   b.   Reporting. The commission shall include in its annual report a
description of the categories of resources made available to community boards
pursuant to this section and the number of community boards that utilized
each category of resources, disaggregated by borough, as well as any
recommended changes to better serve the needs of community boards.



(L.L. 2018/211, 12/3/2018, eff. 4/1/2019)



Section 3204. Cooperation of mayoral agencies.



Heads of mayoral agencies shall cooperate to the extent practicable with the
civic engagement commission in the development and implementation of its
initiatives to strengthen civic engagement in New York city and shall offer
assistance as practicable to the commission in the carrying out of the
functions stated in this chapter.



(L.L. 2018/211, 12/3/2018, eff. 4/1/2019)



 


